<!-- image -->

## Developmental Toxicity  of  Cyproconazole, an Inhibitor  of Fungal  Ergosterol Biosynthesis, in  the Rat

K.  Machera

Laboratory  of  Pesticide Toxicology,  Benaki Phytopathological  Institute, 8 Stephanou  Delta  Street, GR-145  61 Kifissia, Athens,  Greece

Received: 24  January  1994/Accepted: 15  August 1994

Cyproconazole is  a tertiary triazole-alcohol with  antifungal activity. Triazoles  are very widely used  in agriculture and  their  antifungal  activity is related  to the inhibition of fungal steroid  demethylation, with primary site  of action the cytochrome  P-450 (Buchenauer 1987).

Various effects  of triazoles, such  as  reduction  in  fertility of the experimental animals  through  delay  of  ovulation, suppression  of  estradiol levels  and inhibition of  granulosa  cell steroidogenesis have been observed (Milne  et  al. 1987; Wickings et  al.  1987).

The developmental toxicity of  several  triazoles has been reported, and significant differences in  the  teratogenic potential between the  various  molecules  are  evident. The compound  triadimefon when  administered  to  pregnant  rats caused maternal toxicity from the dose of  30 mg/kg  and embryotoxicity  at 100  mg/kg. At the doses of  75 and 100 mg/kg  occasional  cleft palates  were observed and the  noobserved effect level  (NOEL)  for the  fetuses  was 30 mg/kg  (FAO  1981; 1983 b). Similar effects concerning  maternal  toxicity and embryolethality were observed on rats  after  the administration of  triadimenol. The  main  effects  observed  on the embryonic development were skeletal abnormalities.  The NOEL for the developmental toxicity of  triadimenol is  approximately  30 mg/kg  (FAO  1989 b). When bitertanol was  administered  to rats  at doses  10, 30 and  100  mg/kg  a decrease in  maternal  body weight  throughout the  study  and fetal body weight  was observed from the  dose of  30 mg/kg. Teratogenicity was observed at  100 mg/kg, cleft palate  being  the  main effect (FAO  1983 a).  When higher  doses of  bitertanol were tested  on rats, caused acaudia,  exophthalmus, hypognathia  and cleft palate (Vergieva 1990). Embryolethality and teratogenicity were  also observed  when flusilazole was  tested  at  doses up to  250 mg/kg. The  main fetal  abnormalities detected  were cleft palate,  absence of  innominate  artery, skeletal variations and retarded  development. The NOEL determined  was 2 mg/kg  (FAO  1989 a).  When higher  doses of  flusilazole were  tested on rats, caused exophthalmus, hypognathia,  macroglossia  and cleft palate  (Vergieva  1990).  The  administration of 1,2,4triazole to rats  at  doses  up to 200  mg/kg  caused  maternal toxicity, embryotoxicity  and  teratogenicity. The  principal fetal  abnormalities  were  cleft palate  and malformations  of  the  hind  legs  at  the

dose of  200 mg/kg. The NOEL is  100 mg/kg for the  dams  and less  than  this for the  fetuses  (Renhof 1988 a and b).

When propiconazole  was  tested  on rats  at  doses  up to  300  mg/kg  exhibited maternal  toxicity and fetotoxicity at  the  dose of  300 mg/kg. Also  at  the  same  dose delay  of  ossification was observed (Ciba-Geigy 1992).

This  work is part  of  a project aimed to  study  the developmental toxicity of  triazole fungicides. In  this report, the  developmental toxicity of  cyproconazole on Wistar rats  is  presented.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

The  test  compound, cyproconazole was  of  technical  grade purity and  kindly provided by Sandoz  Ltd (Switzerland) through Geopharm (local representative). Initially, a range-finding test  was  performed for  the detection  of  the maximal tolerated dose on the  basis  of  maternal  and fetal lethality. In  this preliminary test a dose of  100 mg/kg was administered  to  10 pregnant  experimental  animals.  The doses administered  during  the  main experiment  were 20,  50,  and 75 mg/kg  body weight, in a  volume of 10  mL/kg.  The  test  compound was  dissolved in carboxymethyl cellulose for  both  the  preliminary and the  definitive test. The same volume  of  the  carrier was administered  to  the  controls.

Female  Wistar  rats weighing  about  200 g,  fed  with  a standard  diet, were allowed to mate  with males  of the same stock overnight,  and  vaginal smears  were examined in the  following  morning  for spermatozoa.  The day  on  which spermatozoa were found  was taken  as  the  first day of  gestation. The females  were randomly distributed in  four  groups,  one control and three  experimental  with  20 animals per group. The  test  compound was  daily  administered  by gavage  to pregnant  rats from the  6th  to  the  16th  day of  gestation. The animals  were weighed daily and examined for  general  condition and behaviour.  They were sacrificed on the  21st  day of  gestation and the  number  of  implantations, resorption sites and live and dead fetuses  were recorded.

The fetuses  were weighed, examined  for external  abnormalities, and crown-rump dimensions were taken.  Approximately  half of  them were fixed in  Bouin's  fluid for the  visceral examination,  and the  remaining  fetuses were fixed in  10%  ethanol, for the  examination of  skeletal abnormalities. The bodies  were dissected  according to the technique of Barrow  and  Taylor (1969). Heads  were  sectioned and skeletons  were  prepared and  examined  according to  the technique of  Wilson (1965).  The data  were analyzed by ANOVA followed  by Duncan's multiple range comparison procedure.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Signs of  maternal  toxicity, such as increased  mortality, symptoms  of  intoxication, or  reduction of  body weight  throughout  the  study  were not  observed in  any of  the treated animals  of  the  definitive experiment.  However, the  general  condition of  the dams  from the  preliminary study  at  the  dose of  100 mg/kg was not  very  good. A statistically significant decrease on the body weight  gain at  the  early  period  of administration, 6th to 1  lth  day, was  observed  in  all the treated  groups when compared  to  controls. This  difference was  more  pronounced  in  animals treated

Tab]e 1. Effects  of cyproconazole on the parameters of pregnancy in  the rat (means  • SD).

I : Statistically significant different from  the control  group. 2 : Seven of ten litters were totally resorbed.

<table><caption><div class="caption">I : Statistically significant different from  the control  group. 2 : Seven of ten litters were totally resorbed.</div></caption><tbody><tr><td>100</td><td>102</td><td>9.00•</td><td>1.60•</td><td>0.40•</td><td>1.2•</td><td>7.40•</td><td>2.68•</td><td>2.70•</td></tr><tr><td>75</td><td>20</td><td>9.25•</td><td>4.g0• z</td><td>4.70• i</td><td>0.20•</td><td>4.25•</td><td>3.16• ~</td><td>3.40• i</td></tr><tr><td>Cyproconazole(mB/kB) 50</td><td>20</td><td>8.50•</td><td>5.20• i</td><td>4.95•</td><td>0.20•</td><td>3.35•</td><td>3.16•</td><td>3.43•</td></tr><tr><td>20</td><td>20</td><td>9.00•</td><td>7.60•</td><td>7.55•</td><td>0.05•</td><td>1.40•</td><td>3.34•</td><td>3.87i0.741</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>17</td><td>]0.06•</td><td>9.64•</td><td>9.53•</td><td>0.06•</td><td>0.41•</td><td>3.45•</td><td>4.34•</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Effects</td><td>No. of litters No. total implants per litter</td><td>No. fetuses per litter</td><td>No. live fetuses per litter</td><td>No. dead fetuses per litter</td><td>No. resorptionsper litter</td><td>Fetal lenBth (cm1</td><td>Fetal body weight (g)</td></tr></tbody></table>Table2.  External, visceral and skeletal observations on fetuses from  dams treated orally with  cyproconazole from  day  6  to  16  of  gestation.

1  :In parentheses, number of  affected litters. 2 :Eight of  the twelve  fetuses examined were  found  dead.

<table><caption><div class="caption">1  :In parentheses, number of  affected litters. 2 :Eight of  the twelve  fetuses examined were  found  dead.</div></caption><tbody><tr><th rowspan="5">Cyproconazole(mg/kg)</th><td>100</td><td>122/3</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>i(i)</td><td>3(1)</td><td>12/3</td><td>11(2)</td><td>10(3)</td><td>2(2)</td><td>2(2)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>75</td><td>94/17 0</td><td>1(1)</td><td>2(1)</td><td>i(i)</td><td>0</td><td></td><td>50/17</td><td>9(4)</td><td>10(9)</td><td>6(6)</td><td>6(6)</td><td>44/17</td><td>2(2)</td><td>17(4)</td></tr><tr><td>50</td><td>99/20 1(1) 1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td></td><td>54/20</td><td>11(5)</td><td>4(3)</td><td>6(3)</td><td>4(4)</td><td>45/20</td><td>7(3)</td><td>30(5)</td></tr><tr><td>20</td><td>151/20 0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1(1)</td><td>4(2)</td><td>86/20</td><td>2(2)</td><td>5(3)</td><td>0</td><td>5(4)</td><td></td><td>65/20</td><td>2(2)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>162/17 0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>100/17</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1(1)</td><td></td><td>62/17</td><td>1(1)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Externalobservations No. offetuses observed/No, oflitters</td><td>Anophthalmiaunilateral</td><td>Microphthalmia unilateral</td><td>Micrognathia ofman&amp;&quot;oula</td><td>Kinky tail</td><td>Cachectic</td><td>Visceral observations No. offetuses observed/No, oflitters</td><td>Cleftpalate</td><td>Internal hydrocephalyofmoderatedegree</td><td>Fullblown internal hydrocephaly</td><td>Ureterohydronephrosis</td><td></td><td>Skeletonobservations No. offetuses observed\No, oflitters</td><td>Large fontanelles</td><td>Very largefontanelles and cranial sutures, delayof ossification</td></tr></tbody></table>with  100 mg/kg.

The effects of  the  test compound  cyproconazole  from both  the  preliminary and the main study,  on the parameters of  pregnancy, i.e. number  of  implantation sites, number  of  live fetuses, number  of  dead fetuses, number  of  resorption sites  per litter, mean  fetal length  and mean  fetal body weight  are presented  in  Table 1.  A dramatic  increase  in  the  incidence  of  resorption sites and dead fetuses  per  litter were observed at  the dose of  100 mg/kg. The total number  of  fetuses  and the number  of  live fetuses  per  litter were decreased.  A statistically significant decrease in  the  fetal body weight  and length  was also  observed.  At  the  doses of  75 and 50 mg/kg,  statistically significant increases  in  the  number  of  resorption sites were observed. In addition, statistically significant reductions  in  the total number  of fetuses, number  of  live fetuses  and decreases in  the  fetal length  and body weight were observed.  At  the  dose of  20 mg/kg  a decreased fetal body weight  was the only  effect observed.

The effects of  the  test compound  on fetal development, as  they  can be evaluated by the  external, visceral and skeletal examination  of  the  fetuses, are  summarized in  Table  2.  The external abnormalities observed,  were of  low  incidence  and cannot be  associated with the administration  of the test  compound. The  visceral examination revealed a series  of  important  abnormalities  such as cleft palate, hydrocephaly  and  uretero-hydronephrosis. Cleft palate was observed  at a frequency of 2.3,  20.4, 18.0 and  85.0 %  at  the doses of 20, 50, 75 and  100 mg/kg, respectively. No cases of  cleft palate  were observed in  the  animals  of  the control  group. Hydrocephaly with lateral ventricles  affected  was  evaluated as hydrocephaly of  moderate  degree,  and hydrocephaly  with  both lateral and third ventricles affected was evaluated  as full blown internal hydrocephaly.  Full  blown internal hydrocephaly was  observed on the  fetuses  from the  dose of  50 mg/kg and the incidence  was  11, 12 and  17%  at  the  doses of  50,  75 and  100 mg/kg respectively. Hydrocephaly of  moderate degree affected  the  fetuses  even at  the dose of  20 mg/kg, and the  incidence  was 6,  7,  20 and 83%  at  the  doses of  20, 50,  75 and 100 mg/kg, respectively. No cases of  hydrocephaly  were observed in the  control animals.  Ureterohydronephrosis was another  abnormality  developed at  frequency of  1.0,  5.8,  7.4,  12.0  and  16.6  %  at  the  doses of  0,  20,  50,  75 and 100  mg/kg,  respectively. The  above  three  abnormalities  appeared  in  a dosecorrelated response.

All  the fetuses  from the range-finding study (100 mg/kg)  were examined  only viscerally due to  extensive fetotoxicity.

The skeleton  examination  of  the  fetuses from the  definitive study  revealed  a dosedependent  retardation of ossification. The  main  effects  caused  by the higher doses administered  (50 and 75 mg/kg) were the  following: absence  of  one  or several  ossification centres  of  sternum, absence of  the 13th rib, less  than three metatarsal  ossification centres, incomplete  development of  skull bones, distinctly larger fontanelles and wider  cranial  sutures. The effect on the  size  of  the  cranial fontanelles was  evaluated  as severe,  which was  usually  followed  by a general delay  of  the  ossification and of  moderate degree which  was observed even at  the lower  doses.  The total frequency  of  the  effect on the  size  of  the  cranial fontanelles was developed at  frequencies  of  1.6, 3.1,  60.0  and 43.0  %  at  the  doses of  0,  20, 50 and 75 mg/kg, respectively.

The observed effects of  cyproconazole  are  in  agreement with the  effects reported elsewhere, related  to other  triazoles. The  majority  of  triazoles examined  were found to  cause maternal  toxicity and embryotoxicity. Teratogenicity appeared in most of  the studied  cases at  maternally toxic  levels. Cleft  palate  was  the most characteristic teratogenic effect caused by the  studied  triazoles (FAO  1981; FAO 1983; FAO 1989; Vergieva 1990; Renhof  1988  a &amp;  b).  Skeletal  variations and retardation of  ossification have  also  been associated  with  the  administration of fiusilazole and propiconazole  (FAO  1989 a;  Ciba-Geigy 1992).  Hydrocephaly has also  been mentioned as  an abnormality  after the  administration of  other  triazoles, but  at  non-statistically significant incidence.  Hydrocephaly was  one of  the  main abnormalities,  after the  administration  of cyproconazole, observed  in our experiment.

However,  the teratogenic  potential greatly  varies  among the different triazole molecules.  The  results from a pilot study in  our laboratory with  the  fungicides penconazole and fenbuconazole,  are  indicative of  a  variation in  the  developmental toxicity among  triazoles.

No  maternal toxicity was  observed when  penconazole, a triazole without  other functional groups,  was tested  at  a single  dose of  300 mg/kg. Slight increase  in the resorptions  was  observed  but at no  statistically significant levels  when compared  to  the  control group.  Delay of  ossification was observed in  65%  in  the fetuses  of  the  test group,  with the  respective  incidence  in  the  control group being 10%.  In  addition, one fetus  out  of  76 exhibited unilateral anophthalmia and two fetuses  omphalocele. On  the  other  hand, when  fenbuconazole,  a triazole with  a nitrilo group,  was tested  at  doses 0,  20,  50 and 200 mg/kg  embryolethality was detected  from  the  dose of  50 mg/kg. A statistically significant decrease in  the  total number  of  fetuses was observed at  the  dose of  200 mg/kg. In  all the  experimental litters, fetuses  with  haematoma on various  sites of  the  body were observed at  a very  high  incidence. In  addition, fetuses with  abnormally  large heart  were detected at  a dose  correlated incidence.  The  main  effect  was  observed on the auricles which were very  hyperplastic and in  many  cases expanding over  the  whole area of  ventricles. In  these  cases pericardium  was also  severely  affected,  showing an extreme enlargement and very loose  appearance. Remarkable  distention of  the first part  of  the  aortic arch  was also  observed.  In  addition, hypoplasia  of  the  lungs was observed at  significant incidence, at  the  highest  dose of  200 mg/kg.

The  above  data indicate that  cyproconazole has embryo-  / fetal  toxicity and teratogenic potential. Maternal toxicity was  clearly observed at  the dose of  100 mg/kg. At other  doses a delay in  the maternal body weight  gain was  the only effect observed on the  treated dams. This  effect was not  persistent throughout  the study.  Fetotoxicity was observed from the  dose of  50 mg/kg  and teratogenicity even at  the  no-maternal-toxicity dose or  the  non fetotoxic dose of  20 mg/kg. The main teratogenic effects were cleft palate, hydrocephaly  and severe  retardation of ossification. From  these  results it can be concluded that  the NOEL for  maternal toxicity and fetotoxicity is  20 mg/kg  and for  teratogenicity is  definitely lower.

For  the  clarification of differences regarding the  developmental toxicity among  the group  of triazoles and  in many cases  for the determination of NOEL for teratogenicity, further studies  need to  be carried out.

The  teratogenic  hazard of triazoles, is  probably caused  by a combination of

bioavailability and cytochrome P-450 mediated metabolism by the  embryo  cells to form a putative  toxic  metabolite (Flint et  al.  1986).  On  the other  hand  the antifungal  activity of triazoles  is related  to the inhibition of fungal steroid demethylation, through  binding to  cytochrome P-450  (Buchenauer 1987). Consequently  the probable mechanisms of antifungal  activity of  triazoles are fundamentally  different from the  mechanisms of  teratogenicity, and it should be possible  to  find compounds with  low  or  no  teratogenic hazard  but  retaining good antifungal activity.

The selection of  triazoles, from  the  already  registered active ingredients, with  high antifungal activity and minimum  teratogenic  hazards is  the  aim of  further studies in  this project.

## REFERENCES

- Barrow VM, Taylor  WJ  (1969)  A rapid  method  for  detecting  malformations  in  rat fetuses.  J Morph  127,  291-306
- Buchenauer  H (1987)  Mechanism of  action  of  triazolyl fungcides  and related compounds.  In:  Lyr  H  (ed)  Modern  selective fungicides.  Longman Scientific &amp; Technical,  England.
- Flint OP, Boyle FT (1986)  Structure-teratogenicity relationships among  the  monoand bistriazole antifungal agents,  using  an in  vitro test for  teratogenic hazard. Fd Chem Toxic  24:649
- Milne  CM,  Hasmall RL, Russel  A,  Watson  SC, Vaughan  Z, Middleton  MC  (1987) Reduced  estradiol production  by a substituted triazole results in  delayed ovulation  in  rats. Toxicol  Appl Pharmacol  90:427-435
- Wickings EJ,  Middleton  MC,  Hillier SG  (1987)  Non-steroidal inhibition of  granulosa cell aromatase activity in vitro. J Steroid  Biochem  26,  6:641-646
- FAO  Technical  Papers.  FAO  plant production  and protection papers.  42.  Pesticide residues  in  food 1981 -  Evaluations, 1982 pp 512-523
- FAO  Technical  Papers.  FAO  plant production  and protection papers.  61.  Pesticide residues  in  food 1983 a -  Evaluations, 1985 pp 47-57
- FAO  Technical  Papers.  FAO  plant production  and protection papers.  61.  Pesticide residues  in  food 1983 b -  Evaluations, 1985 pp 447-450
- FAO  Technical Papers. FAO  plant  production  and protection  papers. 100/2. Pesticide  residues  in  food 1989 a  Evaluations  part  I1: Toxicology,  1990 pp 117-139
- FAO  Technical Papers. FAO  plant  production  and protection  papers. 100/2. Pesticide  residues  in  food 1989 b -  Evaluations  part  I1: Toxicology,  1990 pp 215-236
- Ciba-Geigy (1992)  Letter to  EPA  containing  a summary of  the  report on CGA-64250 technical  teratology study  in  rats; study  number  790011, 1979.
- Renhof M  (1988 a)  1,2,4  -triazole; investigations into  embryotoxic  effects on rats after oral  administration. Report no 17401 Bayer AG  Fachbereich Toxicologie
- Renhof M  (1988 b)  1,2,4 -triazole; investigations into embryotoxic  effects on rats after oral  administration; supplement to  study  No. T 5019339. Report no 17402 Bayer AG  Fachbereich Toxicologie.
- Vergieva T (1990)  Triazoles  teratogenicity in  rats. Teratology  42 (2):27A-28A Wilson JG (1985)  Methods for administrating agents and detecting  malformations in  experimental  animals.  In: Wilson JG, Warkany  J (eds) Teratology, principles and techniques.  University of  Chicago Press,  Chicago.