<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Chemosphere

j o urnal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/chemosphere

## Tebuconazole exposure disrupts placental function and causes fetal low birth weight in rats

Yingfen Ying a , Peipei Pan a , Cheng Zou a , Yiyan Wang a , Yunbing Tang a , Xiaohong Hou a , Yang Li a , Qiang Xu b , Liben Lin b , Jieqiang Lu a , Ren-shan Ge a, *

- a Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Second Af /uniFB01 liated Hospital and Yuying Children ' s Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, 325000, PR China
- b Department of Pathology, The Second Af /uniFB01 liated Hospital and Yuying Children ' s Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, 325000, PR China

## h i g h l i g h t s

- /C15 Tebuconazole damages the structure and function of the placenta.
- /C15 Tebuconazole causes pathological changes of the placenta.
- /C15 Tebuconazole down-regulated Tfrc and Eif2ak2 expression.
- /C15 Tebuconazole up-regulated the expression of Cd34 , Cd36 , Jag1 , Cyp1a1 , Esrra.
- /C15 Tebuconazole lowers placental estradiol level.

## a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history: Received 24 June 2020 Received in revised form 17 September 2020 Accepted 22 September 2020 Available online 5 October 2020

Handling Editor: Jian-Ying Hu

Keywords: Tebuconazole Low birth weight Placental dysfunction Trophoblast Fertilization

Estradiol

* Corresponding authors. Obstetrics and Gynecology, the Second Af /uniFB01 liated Hospital and Yuying Children ' s Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, 325027, PR China.

E-mail addresses: jieqianglu@126.com (J. Lu), r\_ge@yahoo.com (R.-s. Ge).

## g r a p h i c a l a b s t r a c t

<!-- image -->

## a b s t r a c t

Tebuconazole (TEB) is one of the widely used broad-spectrum triazole fungicides. Its accumulation in mammals leads to various endocrine disruptions. However, it is unclear whether the exposure of TEB during pregnancy affects the growth and development of fetus and placenta. Here, TEB was exposed to pregnant Sprague-Dawley female rats from gestational days 12 e 21 of 0, 25, 50 or 100 mg/kg for 10 days. TEB reduced placental estradiol levels. TEB disrupted the structure and function of the placenta, leading to hypertrophy, /uniFB01 brin exudation, edema, calci /uniFB01 cation, arterial /uniFB01 broblast proliferation, and trophoblastic infarction. RNA-seq analysis showed that TEB mainly down-regulated the expression of iron transport genes and up-regulated the expression of genes for immune/in /uniFB02 ammatory responses. Further qPCR showed that TEB down-regulated Tfrc , Hamp , Eif2ak2 and up-regulated the expression of Cd34 , Cd36 , Jag1 , Pln , Cyp1a1 , Esrra , and Aqp1 at 50 and 100 mg/kg. Western blot and semi-quantitative immunohistochemical staining also demonstrated that TEB lowered the levels of TFRC and EIF2AK2 and increased the levels of CD34, CD36, JAG1, CYP1A1, and ESRRA at 50 and 100 mg/kg. In conclusion, TEB severely damages the structure and function of the placenta, leading to hypertrophy of the placenta, low birth weight and feminization of the male fetus possibly via several pathways including iron transport and TNF signaling.

© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

## 1. Introduction

Exposure of environmental pesticides has been shown to be a risk to human health, which is closely related to fetal growth and

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

development, birth defects, infertility, diabetes, and cancer (Mostafalou and Abdollahi, 2017). Tebuconazole (TEB) is one of the most commonly used broad-spectrum triazole fungicides for corn, cereals, vegetables and fruits (Zhang et al., 2015a). TEB is also used as a fungicide and antiseptic for industrial and building materials. As crop yields increase, TEB spreads to the living environment through air, soil and other means (Fenner et al., 2013). The estimated half-life of TEB varies with soil and enantiomers, and /uniFB02 uctuates from tens of days to 600 days (Strickland et al., 2004; Cui et al., 2018). Its accumulation in mammals leads to various endocrine disorders, such as reproductive endocrine disorders, sexual differentiation, mortality, and thyroid disease (Jacobsen et al., 2010; Lv et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019). The endocrine-disrupting effects of TEB have aroused great concern.

The placenta is an important organ in mammals. As the main link between the mother and the fetus, it has more functions than any other organ, including digestion, excretion, breathing, endocrine, and immune system (Maltepe and Fisher, 2015; Staud and Karahoda, 2018). Trophoblast is the core unit of fetal growth, protection, and programming. Abnormal differentiation and function of placental trophoblast cells may lead to serious maternal and infant complications, such as pre-eclampsia, low birth weight (LBW), premature infants, and malformations. By epigenetic effects, it causes fetal programming health conditions, such as type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome, hypertension, and autism (Staud and Karahoda, 2018).

At present, some studies have revealed the negative relationship between fungicide exposure and fetal growth and development. A TEB derivative epoxiconazole reduced estrogen levels in pregnant rats, leading to placental degeneration and abnormal fetal absorption (Rey Moreno et al., 2013). Exposure to TEB during pregnancy may change the histological structure and function of the placenta and have a serious negative impact on the growth and development of the fetus. However, the effect of TEB exposure on the structure and function of the placenta and fetal development is unclear. Here, we report the effects of exposure to TEB during the mid-late pregnancy on fetal placental growth and development and possible mechanisms.

## 2. Materials and methods

## 2.1. Materials and animals

TEB was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Thirty 56-day-old female and /uniFB01 fteen 56-day-old male Sprague-Dawley rats were obtained from Shanghai Shrek Animal Co (Shanghai, China). The animal study was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Wenzhou Medical University, and all experiments were conducted in accordance with the approved guidelines.

## 2.2. Animal treatments

The animals were housed in cages in the animal room with the relative humidity of 45 e 55%, a temperature between 22 and 24 /C14 C, and a 12 h light: 12 h dark schedule. Water and food were freely available. The animals were adjusted for one week before mating. When vaginal plug was observed in mating female rats, they were randomly divided into four groups (six rats in each group): group A (control, with corn oil as vehicle), group B (25 mg/kg TEB), group C (50 mg/kg TEB), and group D (100 mg/kg TEB). TEB was dissolved in corn oil and 1 ml/kg/day was gavaged to each rat. The concentrations of TEB administered in the four experimental groups were 0, 25, 50, and 100 mg/kg/day, respectively. In the control group, rats were gavaged with an equal amount of corn oil. The dose range of

TEB was based on a previous study, in which TEB was found to have endocrine-disrupting effect on Leydig cells (Chen et al., 2019a). Each damwas weighed at the beginning and end of the experiment. TEB treatment started on the 12th day of pregnancy to 21 day, which represents the late second trimester and third trimester stages of human pregnancy. Ten days after TEB administration, rats were euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation at GD21. It was reported that TEB can virilize female fetuses and feminize male fetuses (Taxvig et al., 2007). Therefore, the placenta to have male fetus was selected as the research object in order to avoid the interference of different genders on the experimental results and minimize the existence of confounding factors. The weight of each male fetus, anogenital distance (AGD), placental weight, diameter, thickness, and placental weight ratio were recorded. A placenta was /uniFB01 xed in Bouin ' s solution for histochemical analysis and another placenta from the same female mouse was stored at /C0 80 /C14 C for subsequent detection of gene and protein expression levels.

## 2.3. RNA-seq

RNA-seq was performed by Aksomics Inc (Shanghai, China) as previously described (Wang et al., 2019). In brief, RNA-seq was performed on Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform. FPKM value of gene and transcript levels were calculated. Hierarchical clustering, gene ontology, path analysis, scatter plots, and volcano plots were performed for differentially expressed genes in R, Python, or Shell environments for statistical calculation and graphical display.

## 2.4. Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR)

Total RNA was isolated from the placenta using Trizol as previously described (Wang et al., 2019), and the OD value was measured at 260 nm under Thermo NanoDrop 2000 (Wilmington, NC) to quantify RNA concentration. The expression level of placental genes was judged by reverse transcription and qPCR (Wang et al., 2019). Primers selected from RNA-seq candidate genes include Cd34 , Cd36 , jagged typical gap ligand 1 ( Jag1 ), hydroxysteroid 11 b -dehydrogenase 2 ( Hsd11b2 ), cytochrome p450 family 1 subfamily member 1 ( Cyp1a1 ), cytochrome p450 family 19 subfamily member 1 ( Cyp19a1 ), claudin 11 ( Cldn11 ), eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2-alpha kinase 2 ( Eif2ak2 ), fatty acid binding protein 4 ( Fabp4 ), hepcidin antibacterial peptide ( Hamp ), transferrin receptor ( Tfrc ), estrogen-related receptor alpha ( Esrra ), aquaporin 1 ( Aqp1 ), lamban phosphate ( Pln ), iodothyroxine deiodinase 2 ( Dio2 ), BCL2 apoptosis regulator ( Bcl2 ), gap junction protein beta 2 ( Gjb2 ), incomplete segment polar protein 1 ( Dvl1 ), Enoyl-CoA hydratase, short chain 1 ( Echs1 ), growth arrest speci /uniFB01 city 6 ( Gas6 ), glucose transporter 1 ( Glut1 ), hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase trifunctional multienzyme complex subunit b ( Hadhb ), low density lipoprotein receptor ( Ldlr ), solute carrier family 38 member 1 ( Slc38a1 ), solute carrier family 38 member 2 ( Slc38a2 ), talin 1 ( Tln1 ), solute carrier family 1 member 5 ( Slc1a5 ), adrenomedullin 2 ( Adm2 ), NBL analyzed a DAN family BMP antagonist ( Nbl1 ), placental growth factor ( Pgf ), and S100 calcium binding protein A4 ( S100a4 ). qPCR was performed using the SYBR Green qPCR kit (Takara, Otsu, Japan). Ribosomal protein S16 ( Rps16 ), a housekeeping gene, is used as an internal reference to standardize the expression levels of the genes detected above. The quality of PCR ampli /uniFB01 cation of each sample was controlled by a single peak melting curve. Ct values was recorded and mRNA levels were quanti /uniFB01 ed using the standard curve method. All the information of the primers is shown in the Supplementary Table S1.

## 2.5. Western blot analysis

The protein sample preparation and Western blot analysis were performed as previously described (Wang et al., 2019). In brief, approximately 1 g of placental tissue was added to a radioimmunoprecipitation buffer containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and 2 mM PMSF. After homogenization by ultrasound on ice, the supernatant was collected after centrifugation. The protein concentration was detected using the BCA protein measurement kit (Takara, Otsu, Japan). 25 m g of each protein sample was denatured, loaded, and separated by SDS-PAGE and then electroblotted onto a polyvinylidene /uniFB02 uoride membrane (Amersham Biosciences/GE Healthcare Little Chalfont, UK). The membrane was blocked, incubated with primary antibodies against the following antigens, CD34, CD36, JAG1, CYP1A1, TFRC, EIF2AK2, ESRRA, and ACTB (control), linked with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated IgG secondary antibody. The bands were made visible by enhanced chemiluminescence (Pierce Chemical Co., Rockford, IL). The intensity of the band was analyzed with Image Lab 3.0 software (BioRad, USA). All information on primary and secondary antibodies is listed in Supplementary Table S2.

## 2.6. ELISA for placental E2 levels

Placental E2 levels were measured by a commercial ELISA kit using double antibody sandwich method as described (Chen et al., 2019a). In brief, ultrasonic homogenization and centrifugation were used to obtain placenta supernatant. The placenta supernatant and biotin-labeled antibody were placed in 96-well plates, and the mixture was incubated in a 37 /C14 C incubator. After washing, the IgG anti-E2 antibody bound to peroxidase was transferred to the mixture and incubated and then E2 substrate solution was added, and the reaction was stopped after 30 min. The OD value of E2 was measured at a wavelength of 450 nm within 15 min, and the E2 concentration was obtained in units of pmol/L by drawing a standard curve.

## 2.7. Hematoxylin and eosin staining

The placenta was embedded in paraf /uniFB01 n, cut into 2.5 m m thick sections, and attached to the glass slide. The sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. The cross-sectional image of the placenta was taken with NanoZoomer Digital Pathology (Hamamatsu, Japan). The NDP view 2 software was used to record the labyrinth area (LA), basal area (BA) and the thickness of the placenta cross section. The following parameters were calculated: LA ratio ¼ LA/section thickness; BA ratio ¼ BA/section thickness. Placental section thickness contains LA, BA and decidual area (DA).

Table 1 Basic information of fetus and placenta.

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 1 Basic information of fetus and placenta.</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Basic information</th><th colspan="4">TEB doses (Group)</th></tr><tr><td></td><th>A (0 mg/kg)</th><th>B (25 mg/kg)</th><th>C (50 mg/kg)</th><th>D (100 mg/kg)</th></tr><tr><th>Male fetal rat weight (g)</th><td>5.66 ± 0.07</td><td>5.49 ± 0.13</td><td>5.45 ± 0.14</td><td>5.12 ± 0.09 ***</td></tr><tr><th>AGD (mm)</th><td>3.21 ± 0.05</td><td>2.97 ± 0.07 **</td><td>2.97 ± 0.06 *</td><td>2.94 ± 0.07 **</td></tr><tr><th>Placental weight (g)</th><td>0.52 ± 0.02</td><td>0.57 ± 0.03</td><td>0.58 ± 0.03</td><td>0.65 ± 0.02 ***</td></tr><tr><th>Placental diameter (mm)</th><td>15.04 ± 0.14</td><td>14.61 ± 0.24</td><td>14.88 ± 0.23</td><td>15.53 ± 0.20</td></tr><tr><th>Placental thickness (mm)</th><td>2.59 ± 0.06</td><td>2.63 ± 0.12</td><td>2.88 ± 0.09 *</td><td>2.91 ± 0.10 *</td></tr><tr><th>Fetal-placental weight ratio</th><td>11.36 ± 0.35</td><td>10.32 ± 0.50</td><td>10.75 ± 0.45</td><td>8.11 ± 0.34 ***</td></tr></tbody></table>AGD: anogenital distance.

Placental thickness contains abyrinth area (LA), basal area (BA) and decidual area (DA).

* , ** , *** indicate signi /uniFB01 cant difference when compared to the control (A) at P &lt; 0.05, 0.01, 0.001, respectively.

## 2.8. Immunohistochemical staining

The immunohistochemical staining was performed as described earlier (Chen et al., 2019a). In brief, six semi-placentas of each group were randomly selected for immunohistochemical staining (ABC Kit, Vector Laboratory). The levels of CYP1A1, TFRC, CD34, CD36 and JAG1 were detected. The placenta in each group was dehydrated with xylene and ethanol, and then embedded in paraf /uniFB01 n. The paraf /uniFB01 n-embedded sections (2.5 m m) were dewaxed and rehydrated and endogenous peroxidase was blocked. After the primary antibody was incubated, the secondary antibody was ligated and then the section was stained. Image-Pro Plus software (Media Cybernetics, USA) was used to measure the density and background of selected proteins. The information of primary and secondary antibodies is shown in Supplementary Table S2.

## 2.9. Determination of ferrous ion concentration in placental tissue supernatant

Ultrasonic homogenization and centrifugation were used to obtain the placental tissue supernatant. The BCA protein detection kit was used to measure the protein concentration in the tissue supernatant, and then the iron colorimetric kit (Leagene, China) was used to measure the absorbance at 562 nm. Iron in placental tissue supernatant ( m mol/g) ¼ ([A determination -(A tissue * 0.97)]/A standard) * 35.8/placental tissue protein concentration (g/ L) (A determination referred to the absorbance value of placental tissue supernatant; A tissue meant the tissue absorbance value before adding iron chromogenic agent; A standard represented standard iron absorbance).

## 2.10. Statistics

All data are expressed as mean ± standard error (SEM). One-way analysis of variance followed by ad hoc Dunnett ' s multiple comparison analysis were performed using GraphPad software (version 8.0.2, GraphPad Prism software, San Diego, CA). P values less than 0.05 are considered statistically signi /uniFB01 cant.

## 3. Results

## 3.1. TEB increases placental weight and thickness

In group D (100 mg/kg TEB), the weight of the male fetus decreased signi /uniFB01 cantly by TEB, while the placental weight increased, and the weight ratio of the fetus to the placenta decreased (Table 1). Compared with the control (Group A), the AGD of male fetuses in groups B, C, and D was all reduced (Table 1). The placental thickness in groups C and D was signi /uniFB01 cantly higher than that in group A (the control) and group B. There was no statistical

difference in placental diameter between the four groups (Table 1).

## 3.2. TEB reduces E2 levels and increases Fe2 þ level in the placental tissue supernatant

E2 is an important hormone synthesized by the placenta and can maintain normal placental function. Rats were exposed to TEB during pregnancy for 10 days (Fig. 1a). After measuring the E2 level in the placental tissue, the E2 level in the placenta of group D decreased signi /uniFB01 cantly after TEB treatment (Fig. 1b). Moreover, after measuring the Fe2 þ level, the Fe2 þ level in the placental tissue supernatant of group D increased signi /uniFB01 cantly after TEB treatment

Fig. 1. Experimental design for tebuconazole (TEB) treatment and placental estradiol (E2) levels and placental tissue supernatant Fe2 þ levels. Panel a, regimen (here and below): The dams were divided into 4 groups: groups A (0 mg/kg), B (25 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) and were gavaged with TEB from gestational day (GD) 12 e 21; Panel b, placental E2 level. Mean ± SEM, n ¼ 6. * designates a signi /uniFB01 cant difference when compared with the control (group A) at P &lt; 0.05. Panel c, placental tissue supernatant Fe2 þ level. Mean ± SEM, n ¼ 6. ** designates a signi /uniFB01 cant difference when compared with the control (group A) at P &lt; 0.01.

<!-- image -->

(Fig. 1c). This indicates that TEB disrupts the metabolism of estrogen and iron homeostasis in the placenta.

## 3.3. TEB increases the thickness of placental basal area and causes pathological changes in the placenta

The placenta is divided into LA, BA and the outermost decidual area (Fig. 2a). After HE staining, there was no signi /uniFB01 cant difference in the proportion of LA in the placenta among the four groups (Fig. 2b). However, the proportion of BA in the placenta increased in group B, C, and D when compared to the group A (Fig. 2c). This indicates that TEB affects placental structure. Morphologically, /uniFB01 brin exudation was found in the TEB-treated placentas and /uniFB01 brin exudation was mainly present in the LA, and occasionally in the BA. However, in group D, TEB signi /uniFB01 cantly increased the degree of /uniFB01 brin exudation (Fig. 3a e d). TEB induced edema in the trophoblast space of in LA and BA in a dose-dependent manner with the most serious edema in group D (Fig. 3e-h). TEB can also induce calci /uniFB01 -cation in a dose-dependent manner. Compared with group A, calci /uniFB01 cation was mainly seen in LA, and most of the calci /uniFB01 cation lesions were located near the insertion point of the umbilical cord. We also found that there was a small amount of neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration near the calci /uniFB01 cation position in group D (Fig. 3i e l). Fibroblast proliferation can be seen in the vessel walls in groups C and D. The cellulose in the arterial wall diffused signi /uniFB01 cantly to the center of the lumen, causing the arterial lumen to become signi /uniFB01 -cantly narrowed or even occluded (Fig. 3o e p). These pathological changes were mainly seen in LA. There was obvious trophoblastic infarction in the BA of TEB-treated groups. The cell outline of trophoblasts in BA still existed, but the trophoblast nucleus dissolved and disappeared (Fig. 3r e t). These indicate that TEB adversely induces pathological changes in the placenta.

## 3.4. TEB induces molecular biological changes in placenta

In order to explore the molecular mechanism of TEB on the placenta, we performed RNA-seq analysis. We selected placental samples from group A (control group), group C and group D for RNA-seq.13,821 e 13839 transcripts were identi /uniFB01 ed in all samples. A heat map was used to compare groups C and A, showing the differential expression of the genes (Fig. 4a). The volcano plot showed that 166 genes in group C were down-regulated, while 329 genes were up-regulated by 1.5 times (Fig. 4b). Among the downregulated genes, the top 10 GO categories in biological function are mostly negative immune/in /uniFB02 ammatory responses (Fig. 4c). Among the up-regulated genes, the top 10 GO categories in biological function are mainly immune/in /uniFB02 ammatory responses (Fig. 4d). We also compared the gene pro /uniFB01 les between group D and group A. The heat map showed the differential expression of the genes (Fig. 4e). The volcano plot showed that 236 genes were down-regulated, while 329 genes were up-regulated by 1.5 times (Fig. 4f). Among the down-regulated genes in group D, the top 10 GOcategories in biological function were similar to those in group C (Fig. 4g). We analyzed the up-regulated genes in group D (Fig. 4h). Three of the top 10 GO categories were immune/in /uniFB02 ammatory responses, which were similar to those in Group C. However, 7 of these 10 GO categories were signal receptor regulation, response to lipids, in /uniFB02 ammation, phylogeny, female pregnancy, response to hormones, and anatomical development (Fig. 4h). This indicates that TEB treatment can cause immune and in /uniFB02 ammatory reactions, and the placenta in group D has more serious changes related to structural and developmental pathway.

We used qPCR to verify changes in the RNA-seq genes. We selected some down-regulated genes ( Tfrc , Hamp , and Eif2ak2 , Fig. 5) and up-regulated genes ( Cd34 , Cd36 , Jag1 , Pln , Cyp1a1 , Esrra ,

Fig. 2. Thickness of BA increased after tebuconazole (TEB) treatment. Panel a, HE staining of the placenta of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), B (25 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB. Panel b, the radius of the labyrinth area (LA); Panel c, the radius of the base area (BA). Mean ± SEM, n ¼ 6. No signi /uniFB01 cant difference was observed among groups for LA data. *** designates a signi /uniFB01 cant difference when compared with the control (group A) at P &lt; 0.001 for BA data.

<!-- image -->

and Aqp 1, Fig. 5) in top GO categories as well as many randomly selected genes ( Bcl2, Gjb2, Dvl1, Echs1, Gas6, Glut1, Hadhb, Hsd11b2, Slc38a1, Slc38a2, Tln1, Slc1a5, Adm2 Cldn11, Ndl1, Fabp4, S100a4, Pgf, and Ldlr, Dio2, Supplementary Fig. S1). The Ct value of Cyp19a1 was about 38 cycles, which means that Cyp19a1 cannot be detected in placental samples. Indeed, qPCR con /uniFB01 rmed the similar changes to RNA-seq gene expression.

## 3.5. TEB alters placental metabolic and signaling pathways

We further conducted a gene pathway analysis. Compared with group A, group C þ D has the following pathway changes. Among the down-regulated gene pathways, the /uniFB01 rst 10 pathways were enriched (Fig. 6a), including iron transport, arachidonic acid metabolism, linoleic acid metabolism, and chemokine signaling. Indeed, in the iron transport pathway, Tfrc, Slc11a2, Slc40a1 , and Alox15 were down-regulated (Fig. 6b) and in arachidonic acid metabolism pathway, Ptgs2, Pla2g1b and Alox15 were downregulated (Supplementary Fig. S2). Among the up-regulated gene pathways, the following 10 pathways include arginine/proline metabolism, hematopoietic cell lineage, chemokine/cytokine receptor signaling, TNF signaling, histidine metabolism and

Fig. 3. Pathological changes of placentas after tebuconazole (TEB) treatment. HE staining of the placentas of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), B (25 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB. Panels a e d: /uniFB01 brin exudation; Panels e e h: edema Panels i e l: calci /uniFB01 cation; Panels o e p: cellulose occlusion; Panels r e t: /uniFB01 broblast infarction.

<!-- image -->

phagosomes (Fig. 7a). Up-regulated genes include many cell adhesion molecules such as Cd34 (Fig. 7b), genes in Toll-like receptor signaling pathway (Supplementary Fig. S3) and TNF signaling (Supplementary Fig. S4).

## 3.6. TEB changes placental protein levels

We used Western blot to detect JAG1, TFRC, CD36, CD34, EIF2AK2, CYP1A1, and ESRRA. We found that TEB signi /uniFB01 cantly

Fig. 4. RNA-seq analysis of placentas after tebuconazole (TEB) treatment. RNA-seq of the placentas of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB. Panels a and e: heatmap for group C vs. group A and group D vs group A; Panels b and f: volcano plots for group C vs. group A and group D vs group A; Panels c and g: GO categories of down-regulated genes in biological function for group C vs. group A and group D vs group A . Panels d and h: GO categories of up-regulated genes in biological function for group C vs. group A and group D vs group A. In Panels a, b, e, f: green color indicates down-regulation and red color indicates up-regulation. . (For interpretation of the references to color in this /uniFB01 gure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

<!-- image -->

Fig. 5. Gene expression in tebuconazole (TEB)-treated placentas measured by qPCR. qPCR of the placental mRNAs of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), B (25 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB. Placental genes: Tfrc , Hamp , Eif2ak2 , Cd34 , Cd36 , Jag1 , Pln , Cyp1a1 , Esrra , and Aqp1 . Mean ± SEM, n ¼ 6. * , ** , *** indicate signi /uniFB01 cant differences when compared to the control (panel A) at P &lt; 0.05, 0.01, 0.001, respectively.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6. Gene pathway analysis of down-regulated genes in placentas after tebuconazole (TEB) treatment. RNA-seq of the placentas of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB; Genes in groups C þ D were compared to those in group A. Panel a: Top 10 pathways in the down-regulated genes of groups C þ D; Panel b: Iron transport pathway. Green color indicates down-regulation. . (For interpretation of the references to color in this /uniFB01 gure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

reduced the levels of TFRC and EIF2AK2 in groups C and D, and signi /uniFB01 cantly increased the levels of JAG1, CD36, CD34, CYP1A1, and ESRRA in groups C and/or D (Fig. 8). The protein levels paralleled their mRNA changes. We used immunohistochemical staining to identify CD34, CD36, JAG1, CYP1A1, and TFRC protein levels. We found that the CD34 protein is expressed in the cytoplasm and cytoplasm of trophoblasts of LA, BA and DA in the placenta and in the cytoplasm of placental vascular endothelial cells. Density data showed that TEB signi /uniFB01 cantly increased CD34 protein levels in groups C and D (Fig. 9a e d). CD36 protein was positively found in the cell membranes of trophoblasts and vascular endothelial cells, and they were only expressed in placental LA, but not in placenta BA and DA. TEB increased the density of CD36 in groups C and D (Fig. 9e e h). JAG1 and CYP1A1 proteins were positive in the trophoblast cytoplasm of placenta LA, BA and DA, as well as their concentrations of vascular endothelial cytoplasm were increased in groups C and D (Fig. 9i-p). with the increase of TEB dose concentration (Fig. 9i-p) and TEB were increased in groups C and D. TFRC protein was mainly in the trophoblast membrane of placenta LA and weakly positive in the cytoplasm of placenta BA and DA

trophoblasts. TEB signi /uniFB01 cantly reduced the TFRC protein density in groups B, C, and D (Fig. 9q e t). Interestingly, we observed that the density of TFRC protein in the trophoblast space of placental LA was different, and the expression intensity of LA near the surface of BA and fetus was stronger than that of middle LA (Fig. 9). Although the expression of TFRC in trophoblasts in BA was not high, we still observed a signi /uniFB01 cant decrease in the expression of TFRC in placenta BA in groups C and D (Fig. 9c and d).

## 4. Discussion

The placenta is an important organ between the fetus and mother and plays a vital role in maintaining fetal development. This study shows that TEB exposure during pregnancy can severely disrupt the structure and function of the placenta, leading to hypertrophy of the placenta, and LBW in male fetuses. TEB also reduced AGD, a biomarker of androgen action, and a decrease in AGD in the male fetus indicates a lack of androgen in male offspring, consistent with the previous observation (Taxvig et al., 2007).

Fig. 7. Gene pathway analysis of up-regulated genes in placentas after tebuconazole (TEB) treatment. RNA-seq of the placentas of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB; Genes in groups C þ D were compared to those in group A. Panel a: Top 10 pathways in the up-regulated genes of groups C þ D; Panel b: Cell adhesion molecules. Red color indicates up-regulation. . (For interpretation of the references to color in this /uniFB01 gure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The fetus must obtain nutrition (including iron) and oxygen from the mother through the placenta. If the placenta does not provide adequate nutrition, LBW will occur (Zhang et al., 2015b). As our results in Table 1 indicate, LBW fetuses delivered by pregnant rats suffer from placental hypertrophy. The adaptability of placental morphology and/or function determines the ability and ef /uniFB01 ciency of placental substrates (including oxygen, fatty acids, glucose, amino acids, and iron) to be transferred to the fetus (Kwan et al., 2017).

The weight and size of the placenta affect its ability to transfer nutrient substrates, which varies with environmental endocrine disrupting compounds and animal models (Barker and Thornburg, 2013). This in turn affects the placental ef /uniFB01 ciency (de /uniFB01 ned as the placenta-to-weight ratio) (Krombeen et al., 2019). In general, the placental ef /uniFB01 ciency of normal late pregnant rats exceeds 10 (Norman and Bruce, 1979). However, in this study, placental ef /uniFB01 -ciency decreased with increasing TEB dose. The placental ef /uniFB01 ciency of TEB in group D was only 8.1, which was much lower than that in group A (control) (Table 1). This indicates that the prenatal exposure of TEB seriously affects the ef /uniFB01 ciency of the placenta and reduces the transport ef /uniFB01 ciency of nutrient substrate per gram of placenta weight.

The placenta of most LBW babies is a small placenta. Morphological adaptation increases nutrient transport capacity, such as increased relative surface area, vascularity, and reduced thickness of placental nutrient exchange barrier (Zhang et al., 2015b). On the contrary, this study showed that the placenta was hypertrophy. The weight and thickness of the placental barrier increased, but the placental diameter did not change (Table 1). It is worth noting that the increase in placental thickness is mainly due to the increase in BA without affecting LA thickness (Fig. 2), which is similar to the study of ketoconazole on pregnant rats (Furukawa et al., 2008). In their study, ketoconazole exposure was performed during GD1214, the thickness of both LA and BA increased, but the fetal weight did not change (Furukawa et al., 2008).

Although there was no difference in LA thickness between the

Fig. 8. Western blot analysis of protein levels in tebuconazole (TEB)-treated placentas. Western blot of the placental protein levels of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), B (25 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB. Panel a: Western blot image; Panel b: protein levels of TFRC, EIF2AK2, JAG1, CD34, CD36, CYP1A1, ESRRA. Mean ± SEM, n ¼ 4 e 6. * , ** , *** indicate signi /uniFB01 cant differences when compared to the control (group A) at P &lt; 0.05, 0.01, 0.001, respectively.

<!-- image -->

TEB-treated group and the control group, the tissue structure of the TEB-treated group had serious pathological changes in LA, including /uniFB01 brin exudation, edema, calci /uniFB01 cation, and proliferation of /uniFB01 broblasts in the arterial wall (Fig. 3a-p).

Fibrin exudation is a manifestation at the end of a normal pregnancy and is believed to contribute to the successful separation of the placenta and uterus during labor. However, the excessive increase in exudate is not conducive to the natural delivery of the placenta. Due to hypoxia in the placenta, it may reduce the nutritional supply of the fetus (Sapin et al., 1997). CD34 positive cells are considered to have adhesion function. According to reports, Wnt/ Ca2 þ signal transduction pathway-induced adhesion protein intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) is the basic component of primary human placental cell angiogenesis. Wnt-5a can stimulate the migration of CD133 þ CD34 þ cells and induce their adhesion (Herr et al., 2014). In our study, we found that a variety of cell adhesion proteins, including CD34, CD36, and ICAM-1, which are important in leukocyte transendothelial migration (Fig. 7b).

The amount of amniotic /uniFB02 uid in the uterus during late pregnancy is closely related to fetal development (Fitzsimmons and Bajaj, 2020). AQP1 (encoded by Aqp1 ) has been shown to maintain the permeability of the placenta to water, and then affect the amount of amniotic /uniFB02 uid and ultimately affect the growth and development of the fetus (Belkacemi et al., 2008). Our study found that the placental Aqp1 expression was up-regulated (Fig. 5), which resulted in an increase in the amount of water in the placental LA and caused signi /uniFB01 cant edema (Fig. 3g and h). However, the thickening of the arterial wall led to the narrowing of the of /uniFB01 cial cavity, which made the increase in water in the placenta unevenly replenished to the amniotic /uniFB02 uid, affecting the growth and development of the fetus (Fig.3o and p). In the trophoblast cell line HTR8/JEG-3, it was found that AQP1 played a crucial role in the balance

Fig. 9. Immunohistochemical staining of proteins of placentas after tebuconazole (TEB) treatment. Immunohistochemical staining of the placentas of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), B (25 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB. Panels a e d: CD34; Panels e e h: CD36; Panels i e l: JAG1; Panels m e p: CYP1A1; Panels q e t: TFRC. Panel u: quantitative density of proteins of CD34, CD36, JAG1, CYP1A1, TFRC. Mean ± SEM, n ¼ 6. ** , *** indicate signi /uniFB01 cant differences when compared to the control (group A) at P &lt; 0.01, 0.001, respectively.

<!-- image -->

of fetus-placenta-amniotic /uniFB02 uid (Belkacemi et al., 2008). Some researchers have pointed out that this edema is caused by vascular leakage of the placental LA (Sapin et al., 1997). In addition, in our study, TEB increased the proliferation of /uniFB01 broblasts in the arterial wall and increased the osmotic pressure of blood /uniFB02 ow in the vascular lumen (Fig.3o and p), which in turn supported the pathological interpretation of placental edema. CD34, CD36, JAG1, and CYP1A1 are the four positive markers of vascular endothelium, which was positively correlated with TEB dose, con /uniFB01 rming the thickening of the blood vessel wall and the increase of placental edema.

Placental calci /uniFB01 cation is very common, but due to the limitations of clinical research, the relationship between placental calci/uniFB01 cation and fetal growth and development is not clear (Mastrolia et al., 2016). Placental calci /uniFB01 cation is mainly related to abnormal placental calcium transport (Segawa et al., 2015). The main component of mouse placental calci /uniFB01 cation is calcium phosphate, similar to humans (Akirav et al., 2005). Three pathways for placental calci /uniFB01 cation have been revealed, namely physiological, malnutrition and metastatic calci /uniFB01 cation (Mastrolia et al., 2016). This study found that placental calci /uniFB01 cation was mainly concentrated in placental LA, which is consistent with the results of other researchers (Wallingford et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2020). Moreover, the degree of calci /uniFB01 cation was most severe in group D (100 mg/kg TEB) (Fig. 3). The reason for calci /uniFB01 cation in LA is unclear. Because LA is the main place for maternal and infant nutrition substrate exchange, we speculate that the placental calci /uniFB01 cation in this study is metastatic calci /uniFB01 cation. Throughout pregnancy, calcium is actively transported through placental trophoblast cells to meet the needs of fetal bone growth in the uterus. However, TEB mainly interfered with the active calcium transport of trophoblast cells by downregulating the expression of EIF2AK2 protein in trophoblast cells and then down-regulating the downstream signaling pathways of Ripk1 and Ripk3. It caused placental calcium to passively diffuse back to the maternal circulation through calcium enrichment in the placental environment, and promoted the formation and deposition of calcium in the form of phosphate in placental LA (Figs. 5 e 7). In addition, phospholamban (PLN) may play a key role in calcium homeostasis (Frank and Kranias, 2000). In this experiment, we found that the Pln expression was up-regulated by TEB, indicating that TEB may in /uniFB02 uence the homeostasis of calcium homeostasis.

This study clearly showed that the E2 level of group D was signi /uniFB01 cantly reduced (Fig. 1b). The mechanism by which TEB inhibits E2 secretion is unclear. However, previous studies have shown that TEB can directly inhibit the activity of aromatase (CYP19A1) (Chen et al., 2019b). We checked the results of the RNA sequence of 13,950 total genes. The FPKM value of Cyp19a1 gene is so low that it was undetectable. In addition, the Ct value of Cyp19a1 in the placental samples were over 38, indicating that Cyp19a1 level is almost undetectable. Therefore, we think that the expression of Cyp19a1 in rat placenta is very low, and the reduction of E2 level may be not due to Cyp19a1 expression in the placenta. The effect of TEB on Cyp19a1 in other tissues or its direct inhibition on CYP19A1 activity in the body or its effect on E2 metabolic enzymes may be involved. Regarding E2 metabolizing enzymes, CYP1A1 is a metabolic enzyme that is a member of the cytochrome P450 family and can metabolize E2 to 2-hydroxyestradiol in extrahepatic tissues such as the placenta (Tsuchiya et al., 2005). Overexpression of CYP1A1 in human placental JEG-3 cells reduced the level of E2 (Xu et al., 2019). Our results similarly showed that TEB up-regulated the expression of Cyp1a1 (Fig. 5) and its protein (Fig. 8), resulting in a decrease in E2 levels. In addition, we found that the levels of Esrra gene and protein were up-regulated by TEB. Perhaps, Esrra may be involved in the regulation of E2 metabolism by Cyp1a1 (Gigu /C18 ere,

## 2002).

Although iron is essential for fetal development and maternal health during pregnancy, there are still many unknown mysteries in the regulation of iron metabolism in the placenta and the fetal mother, and the molecular details of iron transport in the placenta are still poorly understood (Cao and Fleming, 2016; Fisher and Nemeth, 2017; Guo et al., 2019). Impaired placental iron transport can lead to impaired fetal growth in the uterus (Mando et al., 2011; Sun et al., 2013; Gomez-Gutierrez et al., 2019). In a healthy pregnancy in the second and third trimester, the concentration of maternal HAMP (hepcidin) is suppressed, thereby increasing the iron supply in the blood circulation (Fisher and Nemeth, 2017). HAMP is a key hormone synthesized in the liver and can regulate the iron homeostasis of various organic systems (Ganz, 2006). The iron content in trophoblasts is mainly controlled by two regulatory proteins. The TFRC protein located on the trophoblast membrane controls iron input to the trophoblast (Briana et al., 2013; Fisher and Nemeth, 2017) (also shown in Fig. 6b). Another protein, SLC40A1, is the only protein that controls iron output from trophoblasts. HAMP can inhibit iron out /uniFB02 ow from the trophoblast by combining with SLC40A1 (Nemeth et al., 2004; Ganz, 2006).

The relationship between E2 and iron steady state is complex. At present, there are few related studies in this /uniFB01 eld. Some studies have shown that changes in E2 levels affect key iron transport genes, including Hamp , Tfrc and Slc40a1 . Studies on the ovariectomized mouse model of E2 de /uniFB01 ciency have shown that it greatly promoted iron homeostasis by regulating the expression of Hamp in the liver (Hou et al., 2012). It is known that the effect of E2 on cellular iron homeostasis increases the absorption of iron by cells, thereby increasing the absorption of iron by up-regulating the expression of Tfrc in cells (Dai et al., 2008). In addition, it has been proposed that increased estrogen levels can up-regulate the iron export gene Slc40a1 (Stuckey et al., 2006). E2 exposure can also increase the expression of Slc40a1 and Tfrc in MCF-7 cells, thus increasing the intracellular iron content (Bajbouj et al., 2017).

In this experiment, the high-dose group E2 level decreased, while Tfrc , Slc40a1 , and Hamp were down-regulated. The iron content in the placenta supernatant of group D increased (Fig. 1c). We speculate that high-dose TEB can reduce the level of E2 in the placenta through Cyp1a1 and Essra , and the reduced E2 level will inhibit the expression of Tfrc gene, thereby reducing the iron input of trophoblast cells in the placenta, thereby reducing the iron content in the placenta. In order to maintain iron reserves in trophoblasts, feedback reduces the expression of the only iron export regulator Slc40a1 gene to offset the decrease in iron reserves in trophoblasts due to the reduced iron input by Tfrc . Therefore, this iron regulation mechanism increases the concentration of ferrous iron in the placental tissue supernatant of group D, which is called intracellular iron de /uniFB01 ciency. In short, high-dose exposure to TEB can reduce iron input and increase the production of placental trophoblasts, reduce the iron reserves in trophoblasts, and increase the iron in the placental tissue supernatant.

The increase in iron in the placental supernatant can allow more iron to enter the fetal circulation through endothelial cells, and reduce the impact of iron homeostasis on the fetus (Fisher and Nemeth, 2017). In addition, iron de /uniFB01 ciency in trophoblasts increases hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a), thereby inducing the response of ROS to intracellular Fe2 þ and programmed hypertrophy (Eckard et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2020). Despite these self-defense reactions, the fetus eventually develops into a low birth weight baby and is ultimately affected by prenatal TEB exposure.

The limitation of the current study is that TEB exposure dose in this study may be higher than the actual environmental exposure dose. TEB can be detected in farm workers and the highest level of TEB was 2.22 ng/kg in hair samples (Schummer et al., 2012). The

exposure period is from the 12th day to the 21st day of pregnancy. This short-term and high-dose exposure is very different from the real environmental scenario. Whether TEB can induce placental toxicity in humans requires further epidemiological studies.

In conclusion, as a key environmental endocrine disruptor, TEB severely disrupts the structure and function of the rat placenta, leading to placental hypertrophy, fetal LBW, and feminization of male fetuses. These results are caused by the superposition of many factors of polygenic changes. We speculate that TEB mainly directly inhibits aromatase activity and up-regulates CYP1A1, thus leading to lower level of placental E2. This partially causes iron de /uniFB01 ciency in placental trophoblast cells by reducing the two key factors of placental iron homeostasis, HAMP and TFRC. In addition, TEB interferes with placental aquaporins and calcium homeostasis. These unfavorable factors have seriously damaged the internal environment of fetal growth and development.

## Author contributions

Y.F.Y. and R.S.G. designed the study, Y.F.Y. performed the experiments, P.P.P. and Y.Y.W. collected and organized data, C.Z. and Y.L. did the initial data statistics, Y.B.T. and X.H.H. fed animals, Q.X. and L.B.L. did the pathological analysis of sections, J.Q.L. participated in design and manuscript retouching, R.S.G. analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript.

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing /uniFB01 nancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in /uniFB02 uence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgments

This work was supported by Department of Health of Zhejiang Province (11-CX29 to RSG). The RNA-seq was provided by KangChen Bio-tech, Shanghai, China.

## Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.128432.

## References

- Akirav, C., Lu, Y., Mu, J., Qu, D.W., Zhou, Y.Q., Slevin, J., Holmyard, D., Foster, F.S., Adamson, S.L., 2005. Ultrasonic detection and developmental changes in calci /uniFB01 cation of the placenta during normal pregnancy in mice. Placenta 26, 129 e 137.
- Bajbouj, K., Shafarin, J., Abdalla, M.Y., Ahmad, I.M., Hamad, M., 2017. Estrogeninduced disruption of intracellular iron metabolism leads to oxidative stress, membrane damage, and cell cycle arrest in MCF-7 cells. Tumour biology : the journal of the International Society for Oncodevelopmental Biology and Medicine 39, 1010428317726184.
- Barker, D.J., Thornburg, K.L., 2013. Placental programming of chronic diseases, cancer and lifespan: a review. Placenta 34, 841 e 845.
- Belkacemi, L., Beall, M.H., Magee, T.R., Pourtemour, M., Ross, M.G., 2008. AQP1 gene expression is upregulated by arginine vasopressin and cyclic AMP agonists in trophoblast cells. Life Sci. 82, 1272 e 1280.
- Briana, D.D., Boutsikou, T., Baka, S., Boutsikou, M., Stamati, L., Hassiakos, D., Gourgiotis, D., Malamitsi-Puchner, A., 2013. Perinatal role of hepcidin and iron homeostasis in full-term intrauterine growth-restricted infants. Eur. J. Haematol. 90, 37 e 44.
- Cao, C., Fleming, M.D., 2016. The placenta: the forgotten essential organ of iron transport. Nutr. Rev. 74, 421 e 431.
- Chen, X., Zhu, Q., Li, X., Huang, T., Wang, S., Wang, Y., Chen, X., Lin, Z., Ge, R.S., 2019a. 276.Pubertal exposure to tebuconazole increases testosterone production via inhibiting testicular aromatase activity in rats. Chemosphere 230, 519 e 526.
- Chen, X., Zhu, Q., Li, X., Huang, T., Wang, S., Wang, Y., Chen, X., Lin, Z., Ge, R.S., 2019b. Pubertal exposure to tebuconazole increases testosterone production via inhibiting testicular aromatase activity in rats. Chemosphere 230, 519 e 526.
- Cui, N., Xu, H., Yao, S., He, Y., Zhang, H., Yu, Y., 2018. Chiral triazole fungicide tebuconazole: enantioselective bioaccumulation, bioactivity, acute toxicity, and dissipation in soils. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 25, 25468 e 25475.
- Dai, J., Jian, J., Bosland, M., Frenkel, K., Bernhardt, G., Huang, X., 2008. Roles of hormone replacement therapy and iron in proliferation of breast epithelial cells with different estrogen and progesterone receptor status. Breast 17, 172 e 179.

Eckard, J., Dai, J., Wu, J., Jian, J., Yang, Q., Chen, H., Costa, M., Frenkel, K., Huang, X., 2010. Effects of cellular iron de /uniFB01 ciency on the formation of vascular endothelial growth factor and angiogenesis. Iron de /uniFB01 ciency and angiogenesis. Canc. Cell Int. 10, 28-28.

Fenner, K., Canonica, S., Wackett, L.P., Elsner, M., 2013. Evaluating pesticide degradation in the environment: blind spots and emerging opportunities. Science (New York, N.Y.) 341, 752 e 758.

Fisher, A.L., Nemeth, E., 2017. Iron homeostasis during pregnancy. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 106, 1567S e 1574S.

Fitzsimmons, E.D., Bajaj, T., 2020. Embryology, Amniotic Fluid. StatPearls. StatPearls Publishing. StatPearls Publishing LLC., Treasure Island (FL).

- Frank, K., Kranias, E.G., 2000. Phospholamban and cardiac contractility. Ann. Med. 32, 572 e 578.
- Furukawa, S., Hayashi, S., Usuda, K., Abe, M., Ogawa, I., 2008. Histopathological effect of ketoconazole on rat placenta. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 70, 1179 e 1184.

Ganz, T., 2006. Hepcidin and its role in regulating systemic iron metabolism. Hematology. American Society of Hematology. Education Program 29 e 35, 507.

- Gigu /C18 ere, V., 2002. To ERR in the estrogen pathway. Trends Endocrinol. Metabol.: TEM (Trends Endocrinol. Metab.) 13, 220 e 225.
- Gomez-Gutierrez, A.M., Parra-Sosa, B.E., Bueno-Sanchez, J.C., 2019. Glycosylation pro /uniFB01 le of the transferrin receptor in gestational iron de /uniFB01 ciency and early-onset severe preeclampsia. Journal of pregnancy 9514546, 2019.
- Guo, Y., Zhang, N., Zhang, D., Ren, Q., Ganz, T., Liu, S., Nemeth, E., 2019. Iron homeostasis in pregnancy and spontaneous abortion. Am. J. Hematol. 94, 184 e 188.
- Herr, F., Horndasch, M., Howe, D., Baal, N., Goyal, P., Fischer, S., Zygmunt, M., Preissner, K.T., 2014. Human placenta-derived Wnt-5a induces the expression of ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 in CD133( þ )CD34( þ )-hematopoietic progenitor cells. Reprod. Biol. 14, 262 e 275.
- Hou, Y., Zhang, S., Wang, L., Li, J., Qu, G., He, J., Rong, H., Ji, H., Liu, S., 2012. Estrogen regulates iron homeostasis through governing hepatic hepcidin expression via an estrogen response element. Gene 511, 398 e 403.

Jacobsen, P.R., Christiansen, S., Boberg, J., Nellemann, C., Hass, U., 2010. Combined exposure to endocrine disrupting pesticides impairs parturition, causes pup mortality and affects sexual differentiation in rats. Int. J. Androl. 33, 434 e 442.

- Krombeen, S.K., Shankar, V., Noorai, R.E., Saski, C.A., Sharp, J.L., Wilson, M.E., Wilmoth, T.A., 2019. The identi /uniFB01 cation of differentially expressed genes between extremes of placental ef /uniFB01 ciency in maternal line gilts on day 95 of gestation. BMC Genom. 20, 254.
- Kwan, S.T.C., King, J.H., Yan, J., Wang, Z., Jiang, X., Hutzler, J.S., Klein, H.R., Brenna, J.T., Roberson, M.S., Caudill, M.A., 2017. Maternal choline supplementation modulates placental nutrient transport and metabolism in late gestation of mouse pregnancy. J. Nutr. 147, 2083 e 2092.
- Li, S., Wu, Q., Sun, Q., Cof /uniFB01 n, S., Gui, W., Zhu, G., 2019. Parental exposure to tebuconazole causes thyroid endocrine disruption in zebra /uniFB01 sh and developmental toxicity in offspring. Aquat. Toxicol. 211, 116 e 123.
- Lv, X., Pan, L., Wang, J., Lu, L., Yan, W., Zhu, Y., Xu, Y., Guo, M., Zhuang, S., 2017. Effects of triazole fungicides on androgenic disruption and CYP3A4 enzyme activity. Environ. Pollut. 222, 504 e 512.
- Maltepe, E., Fisher, S.J., 2015. Placenta: the forgotten organ. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 31, 523 e 552.
- Mando, C., Tabano, S., Colapietro, P., Pileri, P., Colleoni, F., Avagliano, L., Doi, P., Bulfamante, G., Miozzo, M., Cetin, I., 2011. Transferrin receptor gene and protein expression and localization in human IUGR and normal term placentas. Placenta 32, 44 e 50.
- Mastrolia, S.A., Weintraub, A.Y., Sciaky-Tamir, Y., Tirosh, D., Loverro, G., Hershkovitz, R., 2016. Placental calci /uniFB01 cations: a clue for the identi /uniFB01 cation of high-risk fetuses in the low-risk pregnant population? J. Matern. Fetal Neonatal Med.: the of /uniFB01 cial journal of the European Association of Perinatal Medicine, the Federation of Asia and Oceania Perinatal Societies, the International Society of Perinatal Obstet 29, 921 e 927.
- Mostafalou, S., Abdollahi, M., 2017. Pesticides: an update of human exposure and toxicity. Arch. Toxicol. 91, 549 e 599.
- Nemeth, E., Tuttle, M.S., Powelson, J., Vaughn, M.B., Donovan, A., Ward, D.M., Ganz, T., Kaplan, J., 2004. Hepcidin regulates cellular iron ef /uniFB02 ux by binding to ferroportin and inducing its internalization. Science (New York, N.Y.) 306, 2090 e 2093.
- Norman, N.A., Bruce, N.W., 1979. Fetal and placental weight relationships in the albino rat near term. Teratology 19, 245 e 250.
- Rey Moreno, M.C., Fussell, K.C., Groters, S., Schneider, S., Strauss, V., Stinchcombe, S., Fegert, I., Veras, M., van Ravenzwaay, B., 2013. Epoxiconazole-induced degeneration in rat placenta and the effects of estradiol supplementation. Birth Defects Res. Part B Dev. Reproductive Toxicol. 98, 208 e 221.
- Sapin, V., Dolle, P., Hindelang, C., Kastner, P., Chambon, P., 1997. Defects of the chorioallantoic placenta in mouse RXRalpha null fetuses. Dev. Biol. 191, 29 e 41. Schummer, C., Salquebre, G., Briand, O., Millet, M., Appenzeller, B.M., 2012. Determination of farm workers ' exposure to pesticides by hair analysis. Toxicol. Lett. 210, 203 e 210.
- Segawa, H., Shiozaki, Y., Kaneko, I., Miyamoto, K., 2015. The role of sodiumdependent phosphate transporter in phosphate homeostasis. J. Nutr. Sci.

Vitaminol. 61 (Suppl. l), S119 e S121.

- Staud, F., Karahoda, R., 2018. Trophoblast: the central unit of fetal growth, protection and programming. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 105, 35 e 40.
- Strickland, T.C., Potter, T.L., Joo, H., 2004. Tebuconazole dissipation and metabolism in Tifton loamy sand during laboratory incubationt. Pest Manag. Sci. 60, 703 e 709.
- Stuckey, R., Aldridge, T., Lim, F.L., Moore, D.J., Tinwell, H., Doherty, N., Davies, R., Smith, A.G., Kimber, I., Ashby, J., Orphanides, G., Moggs, J.G., 2006. Induction of iron homeostasis genes during estrogen-induced uterine growth and differentiation. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 253, 22 e 29.
- Sun, M.Y., Habeck, J.M., Meyer, K.M., Koch, J.M., Ramadoss, J., Blohowiak, S.E., Magness, R.R., Kling, P.J., 2013. Ovine uterine space restriction alters placental transferrin receptor and fetal iron status during late pregnancy. Pediatr. Res. 73, 277 e 285.
- Taxvig, C., Hass, U., Axelstad, M., Dalgaard, M., Boberg, J., Andeasen, H.R., Vinggaard, A.M., 2007. Endocrine-disrupting activities in vivo of the fungicides tebuconazole and epoxiconazole. Toxicol. Sci. : an of /uniFB01 cial journal of the Society of Toxicology 100, 464 e 473.
- Tsuchiya, Y., Nakajima, M., Yokoi, T., 2005. Cytochrome P450-mediated metabolism of estrogens and its regulation in human. Canc. Lett. 227, 115 e 124.
- Wallingford, M.C., Gammill, H.S., Giachelli, C.M., 2016. Slc20a2 de /uniFB01 ciency results in fetal growth restriction and placental calci /uniFB01 cation associated with thickened
- basement membranes and novel CD13 and lamininalpha1 expressing cells. Reprod. Biol. 16, 13 e 26.
- Wang, Y., Xie, L., Tian, E., Li, X., Wen, Z., Li, L., Chen, L., Zhong, Y., Ge, R.S., 2019. Oncostatin M inhibits differentiation of rat stem Leydig cells in vivo and in vitro. J. Cell Mol. Med. 23, 426 e 438.
- Xu, H., Zhang, X., Ye, Y., Li, X., 2019. Bisphenol A affects estradiol metabolism by targeting CYP1A1 and CYP19A1 in human placental JEG-3 cells. Toxicol. Vitro 61, 104615-104615.
- Xu, X., Li, X., Sun, H., Cao, Z., Gao, R., Niu, T., Wang, Y., Ma, T., Chen, R., Wang, C., Yang, Z., Liu, J.Y., 2020. Murine placental-fetal phosphate dyshomeostasis caused by an Xpr1 de /uniFB01 ciency accelerates placental calci /uniFB01 cation and restricts fetal growth in late gestation. J. Bone Miner. Res. : the of /uniFB01 cial journal of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 35, 116 e 129.
- Zhang, Q., Hua, X., Yang, Y., Yin, W., Tian, M., Shi, H., Wang, M., 2015a. Stereoselective degradation of /uniFB02 utriafol and tebuconazole in grape. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 22, 4350 e 4358.
- Zhang, S., Regnault, T.R., Barker, P.L., Botting, K.J., McMillen, I.C., McMillan, C.M., Roberts, C.T., Morrison, J.L., 2015b. Placental adaptations in growth restriction. Nutrients 7, 360 e 389.
- Zhang, H., He, Y., Wang, J.-X., Chen, M.-H., Xu, J.-J., Jiang, M.-H., Feng, Y.-L., Gu, Y.-F., 2020. miR-30-5p-mediated ferroptosis of trophoblasts is implicated in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. Redox Biol 29, 101402-101402.