<!-- PageHeader="international journal of andrology ISSN 0105-6263" -->


# ORIGINAL ARTICLE


## Endocrine-disrupting properties in vivo of widely used azole fungicides

C. Taxvig, A. M. Vinggaard, U. Hass, M. Axelstad, S. Metzdorff and C. Nellemann

Department of Toxicology and Risk Assessment, National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark, Søborg, Denmark


### Keywords:

azole fungicides, endocrine disrupters,
fetotoxic, ketoconazole, rat


### Correspondence:

Christine Nellemann, Department of
Toxicology and Risk Assessment, National
Food Institute, Technical University of
Denmark, Mørkhøj Bygade 19, DK-2860
Søborg, Denmark. E-mail: cne@food.dtu.dk

Received 5 July 2007; revised 4 October
2007; accepted 11 October 2007

doi:10.1111/j.1365-2605.2007.00838.x


### Summary

The endocrine-disrupting potential of four commonly used azole fungicides,
propiconazole, tebuconazole, epoxiconazole and ketoconazole, were tested in
two short-term in vivo studies. Initially, the antiandrogenic effects of propico-
nazole and tebuconazole (50, 100 and 150 mg/kg body weight/day each) were
examined in the Hershberger assay. In the second study, pregnant Wistar rats
were dosed with propiconazole, tebuconazole, epoxiconazole or ketoconazole
(50 mg/kg/day each) from gestational day (GD) 7 to GD 21. Caesarian sec-
tions were performed on dams at GD 21. Tebuconazole and propiconazole
demonstrated no antiandrogenic effects at doses between 50 and 150 mg/kg
body weight/day in the Hershberger assay. In the in utero exposure toxicity
study, ketoconazole, a pharmaceutical to treat human fungal infections,
decreased anogenital distance and reduced testicular testosterone levels, demon-
strating a demasculinizing effect on male fetuses. Tebuconazole, epoxiconazole
and ketoconazole induced a high-frequency of post-implantation loss, and both
ketoconazole and epoxiconazole caused a marked increase in late and very late
resorptions. Overall the results show that many of the commonly used azole
fungicides act as endocrine disruptors in vivo, although the profile of action in
vivo varies. As ketoconazole is known to implicate numerous endocrine-dis-
rupting effects in humans, the concern for the effects of the other tested azole
fungicides in humans is growing.


### Introduction

Epidemiological research has indicated a causal connec-
tion between human exposure to pesticides and endo-
crine-disrupting effects such as poor sperm quality (Swan
et al., 2003) and increased incidence of cryptorchidism
(Weidner et al., 1998).

Previously we found that many commonly used pesti-
cides had endocrine-disrupting properties in one or more
in vitro tests covering endocrine end points (aromatase
activity, androgen, oestrogen or aryl hydrocarbon receptor
binding). One of these pesticides was the imidazole fungi-
cide prochloraz, which induced significant responses in all
test systems (Andersen et al., 2002; Long et al., 2003).
Subsequently, prochloraz was also found to induce an-
tiandrogenic effects in rats in vivo in a Hershberger test
as well as in developmental toxicity studies (Vinggaard
et al., 2002, 2005a; Blystone et al., 2007). The purpose of
the present study was to investigate the endocrine-

disrupting potential of four commonly used azole fungi-
cides: propiconazole, tebuconazole, epoxiconazole and ke-
toconazole, and to compare the results obtained with
those of prochloraz (Vinggaard et al., 2005a; Laier et al.,
2006). Recently, tebuconazole was found to be endocrine-
disrupting and epoxiconazole to be fetotoxic (Taxvig
et al., 2007) and more details on these findings were
needed. The tested fungicides belong to a large group of
compounds called conazoles, which includes the imidaz-
ole and triazole fungicides. Propiconazole, tebuconazole
and epoxiconazole are triazoles, used in large amounts in
the control of fungi in grain and to a lesser extent in veg-
etable and fruit production. Ketoconazole is an orally
active imidazole antifungal drug used for treatment of
systemic infections and is known to inhibit testicular
androgen production both in vitro and in vivo (Sikka
et al., 1985; De Coster et al., 1986). Ketoconazole was
included in the study, because of its known hormone-dis-
turbing effects in humans and thereby a correlation

<!-- PageFooter="@ 2008 The Authors Journal compilation @ 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . International Journal of Andrology 31, 170-177" -->
<!-- PageNumber="170" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="C. Taxvig et al." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Azole fungicides act as endocrine disrupters" -->

between human effects and animal data could be drawn.
Initially, the antiandrogenic effects of propiconazole and
tebuconazole were examined in the in vivo Hershberger
assay. Secondly, developmental effects of the four fungi-
cides were investigated by dosing pregnant rats from ges-
tational day (GD) 7 to GD 21, followed by examination
of the dams and the fetuses. This later study was per-
formed to investigate endocrine-disrupting effects in
dams, but in particular in fetuses, which are considered
very sensitive. In this study developmental effects in both
female and male fetuses were studied, whereas the Hersh-
berger assay, in this case, was designed to look for antian-
drogenic effects in young adult male rats only.


### Materials and methods


#### Test compounds

The following test compounds were used: propiconazole
97.5% (CAS no. 60207-90-1; Dr Ehrendorfer EHRC
16480000), tebuconazole 98% pure (CAS no. 107534-96-
3; Dr Ehrendorfer EHRC 17178700), epoxiconazole 99%
pure (CAS no. 106325-08-0; Dr Ehrendorfer EHRC
13185000) and ketoconazole 99% pure (CAS no. 65277-
42-1; Dr Ehrendorfer EHRC 14532000) from Bie & Bernt-
sen (Rødovre, Denmark). The vehicle in the in utero
exposure study was corn oil from Sigma-Aldrich (Brønby,
Denmark).

In the Hershberger study, testosterone propionate (CAS
no. 57-85-2; Nomeco A/S, Herlev, Denmark) and fluta-
mide (CAS no. 13311-84-7; Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO,
USA) were employed. All test compounds were dissolved
in peanut oil (no. P-2144; Sigma-Aldrich). Sterile peanut
oil (The Royal Veterinary Agriculture Pharmacy, Copenha-
gen, Denmark) was used for testosterone propionate and
flutamide solutions. All compounds were administered in a
dosing volume of 2 mL/kg body weight.


#### Hershberger test

For assessment of antiandrogenicity, the fungicides were
administered to castrated males treated with testosterone
as previously described (Birkhoj et al., 2004; Vinggaard
et al., 2005b) and the effects were examined in both intact
and castrated testosterone-treated males by analysing
weights of reproductive organs, serum hormone levels
and prostate gene expression as described (Vinggaard
et al., 2005b).

One group of intact animals and nine groups of cas-
trated male Wistar rats were included in the study (n = 6
per group). The intact rats and the one group of castrated
rats served as negative controls and were given peanut oil
only. The rats in the remaining eight groups were all
dosed with testosterone propionate (0.5 mg/kg/day s.c.).

One group was only administered testosterone propionate
and served as the control group to which all other groups
were compared. The positive control group received fluta-
mide (10 mg/kg body weight/day orally). The last six
groups received propiconazole or tebuconazole orally at
doses of 50, 100 or 150 mg/kg body weight/day.


##### Real-time RT-PCR

Ventral prostate cDNA samples were quantified on the
7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA, USA) by standard TaqMan technology
and using the primer and probe sets as described in Laier
et al. (2006). Expression levels of the following genes were
quantified: the prostate binding protein C3 (PBP C3),
ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), testosterone-repressed
prostate message 2 (TRPM-2), complement component 3
(Compl.C3), the androgen receptor and insulin-like
growth factor 1. These genes were chosen because they
have previously been shown to be androgen-regulated or
to be valuable for investigating antiandrogenic effects in
the Hersberger assay (Nellemann et al., 2001, 2005).


##### Hormone levels

In the Hershberger assay, rat lutenizing hormone, rat fol-
licle-stimulating hormone and T4 hormone levels were
analysed as previously described in Vinggaard et al.
(2002).


### In utero exposure toxicity study


#### Animals and exposure

A total of 50 time-mated, young adult Wistar rats (HanT-
ac; WH, Taconic M&B, Ejby, Denmark) were supplied at
day 3 of pregnancy (the day after mating defined as
GD 1). The animals were distributed, housed and handled
as previously described in Vinggaard et al. (2005a). The
day after arrival, i.e. GD 4, animals were weighed and
assigned to five groups of 10 animals per group, with
similar weight distributions. An acclimatization period of
4 days was allowed before starting exposure. The rats
were gavaged with vehicle (corn oil) or 50 mg/kg epoxi-
conazole, 50 mg/kg ketoconazole, 50 mg/kg propiconazol
or 50 mg/kg tebuconazole, respectively, from GD 7 to
GD 21. The dams were given a dosing volume of 2 ml/kg
body weight.


#### Health status of dams

In the five groups of 10 animals, six, eight, nine, eight
and nine rats were pregnant respectively. The females
were observed daily for signs of toxicity. Body weights
were recorded on GD 4 and daily during the entire dos-
ing period. The maternal weight gain from GD 7 to
GD 21 was calculated.

<!-- PageFooter="@ 2008 The Authors" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Journal compilation @ 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . International Journal of Andrology 31, 170-177" -->
<!-- PageNumber="171" -->
<!-- PageFooter="13652605, 2008, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.111 1/j.1365-2605.2007.00838.x by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [19/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Azole fungicides act as endocrine disrupters" -->


### Caesarian sections GD 21

At GD 21 dams were weighed, anaesthetized in CO2/O2
and decapitated and caesarian sections were performed as
previously described in Vinggaard et al. (2005a). Trunk
blood was collected into heparin-coated vials from all
fetuses for hormone analysis; one pool per litter was
made for all male and female fetuses. Body weight and
anogenital distance (AGD) was measured for all fetuses.


#### Hormone analysis

In the in utero exposure toxicity study, testosterone and
progesterone were analysed in serum from dams and
fetuses at GD 21, as were ex vivo testosterone and proges-
terone productions as described in Laier et al. (2006).
Serum 17a-hydroxyprogesterone levels were analysed by
use of a 17a-hydroxyprogesterone-enzyme immunoassay
kit from Assay Designs according to the manufacturer's
instructions (Electra-Box Diagnostica Aps, Rødovre
Denmark). Steroid hormones were analysed in testis and
oestradiol in ovaries as described in Taxvig et al. (2007).


#### Statistical analyses

For statistical evaluation of plasma hormone levels a one-
way analyses of variance (ANOVA) was employed for all
groups and, if significant, followed by the post hoc Dun-
nett's test. Significance was judged at p < 0.05. For statis-
tical evaluation of pregnancy and litter data, the litter was
considered as the statistical unit and the alpha level was
0.05. The results were analysed using ANOVA and to adjust
for litter effects, litter was included in the analysis of vari-
ance as a nested factor.


# Results


## The Hershberger test

The azole fungicides propiconazole and tebuconazole (50,
100 and 150 mg/kg body weight/day each) were investi-
gated for antiandrogenic effects in castrated testosterone-
treated male rats. The body and organ weights were unaf-
fected by the treatments except for an increase in liver
weights caused by propiconazole at 100 and 150 mg/kg
body weight/day and by 150 mg/kg body weight/day
tebuconazole (Table 1). The positive control flutamide
reduced weights of ventral prostate, seminal vesicles/coag-
ulation gland, levator ani/bulbocavernosus muscles
(LABC) and bulbourethral glands as expected for an anti-
androgen (Table 1).

Regarding hormone levels, the only effect observed was
an increase in serum FSH after treatment with 150 mg/kg
body weight/day propiconazole, whereas the positive con-
trol flutamide increased both serum LH and FSH levels as
expected, while T4 was unaffected (Table 1).


<table>
<caption>Table 1. Body weight, organ weights and serum hormone levels</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2">Intact control</th>
<th rowspan="2">Castrated control</th>
<th colspan="8">Castrated rats given testosterone propionate</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Control</th>
<th>Flutamide</th>
<th>Tebu 50</th>
<th>Tebu 100</th>
<th>Tebu 150</th>
<th>Propi 50</th>
<th>Propi 100</th>
<th>Propi 150</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Body weight (g)</td>
<td>183 ± 14</td>
<td>166 ± 3</td>
<td>165 ± 10</td>
<td>165 ± 18</td>
<td>164 ± 16</td>
<td>165 ± 14</td>
<td>170 ± 15</td>
<td>170 ± 15</td>
<td>171 ± 21</td>
<td>173 ± 10</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Prostate (mg)</td>
<td>87.5 ± 10.8*</td>
<td>5.7 ± 3.6*</td>
<td>49.2 ± 18.0</td>
<td>11.1 ± 5.9*ª</td>
<td>57.2 ± 13.6</td>
<td>51.4 ± 10.8</td>
<td>61.0 ± 8.8ª</td>
<td>53.8 ± 15.2</td>
<td>43.0 ± 13.7</td>
<td>59.2 ± 12.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Seminal vesic. (mg)</td>
<td>114.0 ± 36.7</td>
<td>12.5 ± 3.0*</td>
<td>95.9 ± 39.7</td>
<td>20.1 ± 3.9*</td>
<td>106.2 ± 12.4</td>
<td>90.5 ± 7.7</td>
<td>101.4 ± 11.1</td>
<td>92.4 ± 13.3</td>
<td>96.5 ± 20.1</td>
<td>88.5 ± 22.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Musc. lev. ani (mg)</td>
<td>229 ± 24</td>
<td>93 ± 11*</td>
<td>199 ± 12</td>
<td>124 ± 24*</td>
<td>202 ± 38</td>
<td>216.7 ± 22.6</td>
<td>222 ± 27</td>
<td>208.9 ± 25</td>
<td>204 ± 38</td>
<td>221 ± 23</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Bulbourethral gl. (mg)</td>
<td>15.8 ± 4.1*</td>
<td>1.7 ± 0.7*ª</td>
<td>9.0 ± 2.2</td>
<td>1.8 ± 0.8*</td>
<td>10.5 ± 1.3</td>
<td>10.4 ± 1.3</td>
<td>10.7 ± 2.0</td>
<td>10.2 ± 1.7</td>
<td>9.2 ± 1.9ª</td>
<td>10.9 ± 1.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pituitary (mg)</td>
<td>6.2 ± 0.5</td>
<td>7.6 ± 1.0</td>
<td>6.4 ± 0.6</td>
<td>6.6 ± 1.9</td>
<td>6.5 ± 0.7</td>
<td>6.7 ± 0.9</td>
<td>7.5 ± 1.0</td>
<td>6.9 ± 0.6</td>
<td>7.4 ± 0.7</td>
<td>7.5 ± 0.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Thyroid (mg)</td>
<td>9.5 ± 3.8</td>
<td>9.1 ± 5.0</td>
<td>8.0 ± 2.0</td>
<td>8.3 ± 1.1</td>
<td>8.0 ± 1.0</td>
<td>8.2 ± 1.8</td>
<td>8.4 ± 3.0</td>
<td>8.1 ± 1.8</td>
<td>7.7 ± 2.7</td>
<td>7.3 ±1.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Liver (g)</td>
<td>8.2 ± 0.6*</td>
<td>7.2 ± 0.3</td>
<td>6.9 ± 0.5</td>
<td>7.7 ± 0.9</td>
<td>7.2 ± 0.8</td>
<td>7.4 ±0.7</td>
<td>8.5 ± 1.0*</td>
<td>7.9 ± 0.9</td>
<td>8.2 ± 1.1*</td>
<td>8.5 ± 0.5*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Kidney (g)</td>
<td>1.5 ± 0.1ª</td>
<td>1.3 ± 0.1</td>
<td>1.3 ±0.1</td>
<td>1.3 ± 0.1</td>
<td>1.2 ± 0.1</td>
<td>1.3 ±0.1</td>
<td>1.4 ±0.2</td>
<td>1.4 ±0.1</td>
<td>1.4 ± 0.2</td>
<td>1.4 ±0.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Serum hormone levels</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LH (ng/ml)</td>
<td>1.20 ± 0.54</td>
<td>2.0 ± 18.9*</td>
<td>0.8 ± 1.3</td>
<td>15.8 ± 6.2*</td>
<td>0.9 ± 0.8</td>
<td>0.5 ± 0.6</td>
<td>1.0 ± 1.0</td>
<td>1.6 ± 1.2</td>
<td>1.5 ±2.8</td>
<td>1.9 ± 1.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FSH (ng/ml)</td>
<td>9.80 ± 0.97*</td>
<td>32.2 ± 5.6*</td>
<td>20.8 ± 3.2</td>
<td>36.9 ± 5.0*</td>
<td>24.2 ± 3.7</td>
<td>19.7 ± 5.8</td>
<td>21.6 ± 3.5</td>
<td>21.5 ± 7.8</td>
<td>24.1 ± 6.9</td>
<td>32.7 ± 0.8*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>T4 (nm)</td>
<td>127 ± 41</td>
<td>110 ± 28</td>
<td>140 ± 41</td>
<td>123 ± 23</td>
<td>145 ± 33</td>
<td>141 ± 39</td>
<td>146 ± 42</td>
<td>122 ± 29</td>
<td>116 ± 29</td>
<td>127 ± 29</td>
</tr>
</table>

Data represents mean ± SEM (n = 6). ªn = 5; one-way anova. * Statistical significance compared to controls by Dunnett's test (p < 0.05).


<!-- PageFooter="C. Taxvig et al." -->
<!-- PageFooter="13652605, 2008, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.111 1/j.1365-2605.2007.00838.x by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [19/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley. com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Journal compilation @ 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . International Journal of Andrology 31, 170-177" -->
<!-- PageFooter="@ 2008 The Authors" -->
<!-- PageNumber="172" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="C. Taxvig et al." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Azole fungicides act as endocrine disrupters" -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Figure 1 PBP C3, ODC, TRPM-2 and Compl.C3 mRNA expressed relative to the housekeeping gene 18S rRNA in ventral prostate from castrated rats treated for 7 days with testosterone propionate (T) (0.5 mg/kg/ s.c.) with or without flutamide (10 mg/kg orally) or with tebuconazole (tebu) or propiconazole (propi) (50, 100 and 150 mg/kg orally). The rats in the group labelled 'Control' were given testosterone propionate alone, and this group served as the control group to which all groups were compared. The 'Intact animal' as well as the 'Castrated control' was given oil only. Data represent the mean ± SEM (n = 6). * Indicates statistically significant difference compared to controls (castrated testosterone-treated animals) (p &lt; 0.05).</figcaption>

70

40

PBP C3 mRNA/18S RNA

ODC mRNA/18S mRNA (x10-3)

\*

60

Compl. C3 mRNA/18SmRNA (x10-4)

TRPM-2 mRNA/18SmRNA (10-2)

\*

50

30

Relative expression

Relative expression

40

\*

\*

20

\*

\*

\*

30

T

\*

\*

\*

20

10

\*

\*

10

\*

0

Intact animal
Castrated control

Control

T+ flutamide

T+ tebu 50

T+ tebu 100

T+ tebu 150

T+ propi 50

T+ propi 100

T+ propi 150

Intact animal
Castrated control

Control
T+ flutamide

T+ tebu 50

T+ tebu 100

T+ tebu 150

T+ propi 50

T+ propi 100

T+ propi 150

0

Intact animal

Castrated control

Control

T+ flutamide

T+ tebu 50

T+ tebu 100

T+ tebu 150

T+ propi 50

T+ propi 100

T+ propi 150

Intact animal

Castrated control

Control

T+ flutamide

T+ tebu 50

T+ tebu 100

T+ tebu 150

T+ propi 50

T+ propi 100

T+ propi 150

</figure>


The gene expression levels in the ventral prostate of
PBP C3, TRPM-2 and Compl.C3 were unaffected by azole
fungicide treatment, whereas ODC was significantly
decreased by all doses of propiconazole and by the high-
est dose of tebuconazole. The antiandrogen flutamide,
which was given as a positive control, had a statistically
significant effect on the expression of all genes, as
expected and caused qualitatively the same effects as seen
after castration (Fig. 1).


### In utero toxicity testing

The effects of propiconazole, tebuconazole, epoxiconazole
and ketoconazole were investigated by dosing pregnant
dams during gestation followed by examination of fetuses
for effects on sexual differentiation.


#### Pregnancy and litter data

Ketoconazole induced a significant reduction in body
weight of the dams, as well as a decrease in the number
of live fetuses (Table 2). Tebuconazole, epoxiconazole and
ketoconazole induced a high frequency of post-implanta-
tion loss and epoxiconazole also caused a marked increase
in late and very late resorptions. Propiconazole and epox-
iconazole caused increased fetal weight in both sexes,
although for propiconazole the difference was only signif-
icant in male fetuses (Table 2).


#### Anogenital distance

Ketoconazole significantly decreased the AGD in both
male and female fetuses (Table 2). No significant effects
on AGD of propiconazole, tebuconazole or epoxiconazole
were observed.


#### Hormone levels

In dams, a decrease in the plasma oestradiol level was
seen in the tebuconazole-, epoxiconazole- and ketoconaz-
ole-exposed groups. Epoxiconazole led to an increase in
the testosterone level (Table 3). Furthermore, in propico-
nazole-exposed dams a significant increase in 17x-hy-
droxyprogesterone was observed (Table 3).

Testicular testosterone and progesterone were analysed
in male fetuses. Tebuconazole caused a significant
increase in progesterone levels and testosterone levels
were significantly decreased by ketoconazole (Table 3).
Propiconazole and epoxiconazole had no significant
effect on the measured hormone levels in fetuses
(Table 3). No significant effects were found on ex vivo
testicular testosterone and progesterone production;
however, a tendency towards a decrease in testosterone
production was seen in all four groups, especially in the
ketoconazole group (Table 3). No changes were
observed in fetal plasma testosterone and progesterone
levels or in the oestradiol levels in ovaries (data not
shown).

<!-- PageFooter="@ 2008 The Authors Journal compilation @ 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . International Journal of Andrology 31, 170-177" -->
<!-- PageNumber="173" -->
<!-- PageFooter="13652.605. 2008. 2. Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.111 1/j.1365-2605.2007.00838.x by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [19/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley. com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Azole fungicides act as endocrine disrupters" -->
<!-- PageHeader="C. Taxvig et al." -->


<table>
<caption>Table 2 Pregnancy and litter data</caption>
<tr>
<th>GD21 Caesarian section</th>
<th>1. Control</th>
<th>2. Propi-50</th>
<th>3. Tebu-50</th>
<th>4. Epoxi-50</th>
<th>5. Keto-50</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No. dams</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Maternal body weight</td>
<td>224.0 ± 8.3</td>
<td>218.5 ± 5.2</td>
<td>224.7 ± 4.5</td>
<td>218.2 ± 3.9</td>
<td>200.8 ± 5.8 **</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No. implantations</td>
<td>11.3 ± 0.8</td>
<td>12.3 ± 0.4</td>
<td>11.3 ± 0.9</td>
<td>11.9 ± 0.5</td>
<td>9.2 ± 1.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No. live fetuses</td>
<td>11.3 ± 0.8</td>
<td>12.0 ± 0.4</td>
<td>10.4 ± 1.2</td>
<td>9.0 ± 1.1</td>
<td>4.9 ± 1.4 **</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>% post-implantation loss</td>
<td>0.0 ± 0.0</td>
<td>2.0 ± 1.3</td>
<td>11.4 ± 6.2 *</td>
<td>25.1 ± 8.0 *</td>
<td>47.7 ± 12.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>% late res</td>
<td>0.0 ± 0.0</td>
<td>0.0 ± 0.0</td>
<td>4.4 ± 4.4</td>
<td>22.4 ± 7.9 *</td>
<td>45.8 ± 12.8 **</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>% very late res</td>
<td>0.0 ± 0.0</td>
<td>0.0 ± 0.0</td>
<td>2.2 ± 2.2</td>
<td>15.5 ± 5.6 *</td>
<td>22.5 ± 7.6 *</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>% males</td>
<td>56.5 ± 2.6</td>
<td>52.3 ± 2.0</td>
<td>48.3 ± 7.6</td>
<td>61.1 ± 6.3</td>
<td>63.0 ± 10.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male fetal weightª</td>
<td>3.6 ± 0.2</td>
<td>4.5 ± 0.3*</td>
<td>3.9 ± 0.3</td>
<td>4.8 ± 0.3*</td>
<td>3.9 ± 0.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Female fetal weightª</td>
<td>3.5 ± 0.2</td>
<td>4.2 ± 0.3</td>
<td>3.6 ± 0.2</td>
<td>4.3 ± 0.3*</td>
<td>3.5 ± 0.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male AGD (mm)b</td>
<td>3.76 ± 0.08</td>
<td>3.87 ± 0.06</td>
<td>3.75 ± 0.05</td>
<td>3.97 ± 0.06</td>
<td>3.46 ± 0.15 **</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male AGD index</td>
<td>2.47 ± 0.03</td>
<td>2.37 ± 0.06</td>
<td>2.41 ± 0.07</td>
<td>2.39 ± 0.04</td>
<td>2.20 ± 0.07 **</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Female AGD (mm)b</td>
<td>2.12 ± 0.03</td>
<td>2.15 ± 0.06</td>
<td>2.12 ± 0.05</td>
<td>2.07 ± 0.04</td>
<td>1.90 ± 0.05 **</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Female AGD index</td>
<td>1.40 ± 0.03</td>
<td>1.35 ± 0.05</td>
<td>1.40 ± 0.05</td>
<td>1.28 ± 0.03</td>
<td>1.26 ± 0.03*</td>
</tr>
</table>

Propi-50, propiconazole 50 mg/kg/day; Tebu-50, tebuconazole 50 mg/kg/day; Epoxi-50, epoxiconazole 50 mg/kg/day; Keto-50, ketoconazole
50 mg/kg/day; res, resorption i.e. regression of the fetus; AGD, anogenital distance. Data represent group means, based on litter mean ± SEM.
ªFetal body weight was analysed using the live number of fetuses as a covariate. "AGD was analysed both with and without the cubic root of
body weight as a covariate and both analyses showed that only group 5 was significantly affected. AGD index means the AGD divided by the
cubic root of body weight. Values shown in bold are statistically significantly different compared with control, *p < 0.05 and ** p < 0.01 respec-
tively.


<table>
<caption>Table 3 Plasma hormone levels in dams at GD 21 and testicular hormone levels in fetuses</caption>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>17a-Hydroxyprogesterone (ng/ml)</th>
<th>Progesterone mean (nm)</th>
<th>Testosterone mean (nm)</th>
<th>Oestradiol mean (nm)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Control</td>
<td>13.11 ± 4.02 (8)</td>
<td>95 ± 100 (9)</td>
<td>0.38 ± 0.32 (9)</td>
<td>0.036 ± 0.024(9)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Propiconazole 50 mg/kg</td>
<td>33.37 ± 12.95*(7)</td>
<td>65 ± 71 (9)</td>
<td>0.57 ± 0.26 (9)</td>
<td>0.029 ± 0.011(10)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tebuconazole 50 mg/kg</td>
<td>17.85 ± 9.87 (8)</td>
<td>161 ± 126 (10)</td>
<td>0.29 ± 0.19 (10)</td>
<td>0.015 ± 0.006*(10)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Epoxyconazole 50 mg/kg</td>
<td>23.77 ± 10.41 (9)</td>
<td>175 ± 102 (10)</td>
<td>0.99 ± 0.57*(10)</td>
<td>0.021 ± 0.006*(10)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ketoconazole 50 mg/kg</td>
<td>6.75 ± 3.56 (10)</td>
<td>32 ± 29 (9)</td>
<td>0.13 ± 0.12 (9)</td>
<td>0.015 ± 0.004*(10)</td>
</tr>
</table>


<table>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Progesterone (ng/testis)</th>
<th>Testosterone (ng/testis)</th>
<th>Testosterone production (ng/testis)</th>
<th>Progesterone production (ng/testis)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Control</td>
<td>0.08 ± 0.04 (16)</td>
<td>1.64 ± 0.68 (13)</td>
<td>4.90 ± 3.80 (6)</td>
<td>0.001 ± 0.00 (6)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Propiconazole 50 mg/kg</td>
<td>0.10 ± 0.06 (21)</td>
<td>1.79 ± 0.81 (19)</td>
<td>3.10 ± 2.70 (8)</td>
<td>0.003 ± 0.001 (8)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tebuconazole 50 mg/kg</td>
<td>0.27 ± 0.12*(23)</td>
<td>1.38 ± 0.88 (23)</td>
<td>2.50 ± 1.60 (8)</td>
<td>0.004 ± 0.002 (8)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Epoxyconazole 50 mg/kg</td>
<td>0.06 ± 0.04 (16)</td>
<td>1.42 ± 0.81 (17)</td>
<td>2.40 ± 1.10 (8)</td>
<td>0.003 ± 0.003 (8)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ketoconazole 50 mg/kg</td>
<td>0.07 ± 0.00 (14)</td>
<td>0.35 ± 0.44*(14)</td>
<td>1.10 ± 0.60 (6)</td>
<td>0.004 ± 0.002 (6)</td>
</tr>
</table>

Testes from male fetuses (GD 21) exposed to propiconazole, tebuconazole, epoxicinazole or ketoconazole (50 mg/kg) were extracted with diethyl
ether and hormone levels were analysed as described in Materials and methods. Data represent mean + SD. Values shown in bold are statistically
significantly different compared with control, *p < 0.05. ( ) = n.


### Discussion

The overall objective of this study was to identify poten-
tial common modes of actions for the endocrine disrup-
tion effects of azole fungicides.

The imidazole prochloraz has previously been demon-
strated to be antiandrogenic in adult male rats and to dis-
turb reproductive development in the offspring after
perinatal exposure (Noriega et al., 2005; Vinggaard et al.,
2005a; Laier et al., 2006). Tebuconazole and propiconaz-

ole have demonstrated antiandogenic activity in vitro
(Birkhøj, M., Taxvig, C., Vinggaard, A.M., Nellemann, C.
and Andersen, H.R., unpublished data), but in contrast to
prochloraz, that induced marked antiandrogenic effects at
doses between 50 and 150 mg/kg body weight/day in the
Hershberger assay, no antiandrogenic effects were found
for tebuconazole and propiconazole in this test. At
150 mg/kg body weight/day, propiconazole increased
FSH levels and both compounds caused a down-regula-
tion of ODC mRNA in ventral prostates at this dose level.

<!-- PageFooter="@ 2008 The Authors Journal compilation @ 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . International Journal of Andrology 31, 170-177" -->
<!-- PageNumber="174" -->
<!-- PageFooter="13652605, 2008, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.111 1/j. 1365-2605.2007.00838.x by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [19/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="C. Taxvig et al." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Azole fungicides act as endocrine disrupters" -->

ODC is an androgen-regulated gene but is regulated by
other pathways as well, including regulation by oestrogens
(Nellemann et al., 2005). As none of the other end points,
such as weight of androgen-dependent organs, expression
of androgen-responsive genes or serum levels of LH were
affected, we believe that the observed effects are the result
of a non-androgen-regulated pathway. Liver weights were
increased with the highest doses of both tebuconazole
and propiconazole, as observed previously for prochloraz.
A stimulation of liver growth is often observed with
chemicals that induce microsomal liver enzymes like cyto-
chrome P450 enzymes (Juberg et al., 2006).

The results from this study demonstrate a demasculiniz-
ing effect of ketoconazole on male fetuses, as both
decreased AGD and reduced testicular testosterone levels
were observed. Furthermore, ketoconazole also resulted in
a decreased AGD in female fetuses. The mechanism
behind this effect of ketoconazole on female fetuses is
unknown, but looking at the plasma hormone levels mea-
sured in the dams, a tendency towards a decrease in all
measured hormone levels is observed. An overall distur-
bance of the steroid hormone balance at the level of
cholesterol could be the cause of these disturbances. This
would agree with studies showing that ketoconazole inhib-
its cholesterol synthesis (Kan et al., 1985). No significant
effect on AGD was observed for any of the other tested
fungicides in the current study. The observed effects of
ketoconazole on male fetuses are in good agreement with
previous in vivo studies where ketoconazole has been
found to inhibit testicular function and male reproductive
function, e.g. by causing spermatid retention and decrea-
sed serum testosterone levels in male rats (Adams et al.,
1998; O'Connor et al., 2002). In humans, ketoconazole
has been found to cause decreases in plasma testosterone
and cortisol levels (Pont et al., 1982a,b), resulting in
gynaecomastia and oligospermia in men and menstrual
irregularities in women (Thompson & Carter, 1993).

Tebuconazole caused a significant increase in testicular
progesterone levels, in agreement with our recent study,
where tebuconazole also caused a significant increase in
testicular progesterone and 17a-hydroxyprogesterone lev-
els and a decreased testicular testosterone level at GD 21,
indicating demasculinization of male fetuses (Taxvig
et al., 2007). No demasculinizing effects on male fetuses
were seen with epoxiconazole or propiconazole adminis-
tration. In contrast, an increased fetal weight was
observed, which might be related to the up-regulated lev-
els of testosterone observed in the dams (only statistically
significant for epoxiconazole-exposed dams). For epoxico-
nazole, the increased maternal testosterone level in plasma
as well as the reduced oestradiol level, is in agreement
with studies reported as part of the Danish approval of
epoxiconazole, where increased serum concentrations of

testosterone, androstendion, FSH and ACTH as well as
reduced oestradiol, corticosterone and aldosterone was
reported in adult male rats after oral administration of
approximately 250 mg/kg body weight/day (3000 p.p.m.
in the feed) for 28 days. The marked increase in post-
implantation loss as well as late resorptions is in agree-
ment with results of a previous study, where epoxiconaz-
ole was found to be markedly fetotoxic (Taxvig et al.,
2007). Overall the results from our studies reveal that
four of the commonly used azole fungicides act as endo-
crine disruptors in vivo. However, the profile of action in
vivo in developmental toxicity studies varied. The imidaz-
oles prochloraz and ketoconazole show more endocrine-
disrupting activity in vivo and have a profile of action
that is more alike than for the triazoles. Both imidazoles
cause demasculinization of the male offspring or fetuses
after perinatal exposure (Noriega et al., 2005; Vinggaard
et al., 2005a; Laier et al., 2006), but tebuconazole has also
been found to demasculinize the male offspring and to
possess some of the same endocrine effects as prochloraz
(Taxvig et al., 2007). Epoxiconazole is clearly fetotoxic, an
effect now also observed for ketoconazole with increases
in post-implantation loss and late/very late resorptions.
Based on the many endocrine-disrupting effects of
ketoconazole in man, there are reasons for concern
regarding the human impacts of the partly similar azole
fungicides used within gardening and agriculture.


### Acknowledgements

This study was supported by The Danish Environmental
Protection Agency (grant nos 7041-0344 and 669-00039).
We are indebted to Birgitte Møller Plesning, Heidi Let-
ting, Morten Andreasen, Bo Herbst, Dorte Hansen, Ulla
El-Baroudy and Lillian Sztuk for excellent technical assis-
tance.


### References

Adams, M. L., Meyer, E. R. & Cicero, T. J. (1998) Imidazoles
suppress rat testosterone secretion and testicular interstitial
fluid formation in vivo. Biology of Reproduction 59, 248-254.

Andersen, H. R., Vinggaard, A. M., Rasmussen, T. H.,
Gjermandsen, I. M. & Bonefeld-Jorgensen, E. C. (2002)
Effects of currently used pesticides in assays for
estrogenicity, androgenicity and aromatase activity in vitro.
Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 179, 1-12.

Birkhoj, M., Nellemann, C., Jarfelt, K., Jacobsen, H., Andersen,
H. R., Dalgaard, M. & Vinggaard, A. M. (2004) The
combined antiandrogenic effects of five commonly used
pesticides. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 201, 10-20.

Blystone, C. R., Furr, J., Lambright, C. S., Howdeshell,

K. L., Ryan, B. C., Wilson, V. S., LeBlanc, G. A. & Gray,

<!-- PageFooter="@ 2008 The Authors" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Journal compilation @ 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . International Journal of Andrology 31, 170-177" -->
<!-- PageNumber="175" -->
<!-- PageFooter="13652605, 2008, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.111 1/j.1365-2605.2007.00838.x by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [19/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://on linelibrary.wiley. com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->


### Azole fungicides act as endocrine disrupters

<!-- PageHeader="C. Taxvig et al." -->

L. E. Jr (2007) Prochloraz inhibits testosterone production
at dosages below those that affect androgen-dependent
organ weights or the onset of puberty in the male Sprague-
Dawley rat. Toxicological Sciences 97, 65-74.

De Coster, R., Caers, I., Coene, M. C., Amery, W., Beerens, D.
& Haelterman, C. (1986) Effects of high dose ketoconazole
therapy on the main plasma testicular and adrenal steroids
in previously untreated prostatic cancer patients. Clinical
Endocrinology 24, 657-664.

Juberg, D. R., Mudra, D. R., Hazelton, G. A. & Parkinson, A.
(2006) The effect of fenbuconazole on cell proliferation and
enzyme induction in the liver of female CD1 mice. Toxicol-
ogy and Applied Pharmacology 214, 178-187.

Kan, P. B., Hirst, M. A. & Feldman, D. (1985) Inhibition of
steroidogenic cytochrome P-450 enzymes in rat testis by
ketoconazole and related imidazole anti-fungal drugs. Jour-
nal of Steroid Biochemistry 23, 1023-1029.

Laier, P., Metzdorff, S. B., Borch, J., Hagen, M. L., Hass, U.,
Christiansen, S. et al. (2006) Mechanisms of action underly-
ing the antiandrogenic effects of the fungicide prochloraz.
Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 213, 160-171.

Long, M., Laier, P., Vinggaard, A. M., Andersen, H. R., Lyngg-
aard, J. & Bonefeld-Jorgensen, E. C. (2003) Effects of
currently used pesticides in the AhR-CALUX assay: compar-
ison between the human TV101L and the rat H4IIE cell line.
Toxicology 194, 77-93.

Nellemann, C., Vinggaard, A. M., Dalgaard, M., Hossaini, A. &
Larsen, J. J. (2001) Quantification of antiandrogen effect
determined by Lightcycler technology. Toxicology 163, 29-38.
Nellemann, C., Dalgaard, M., Holst, B., Bonefeld-Jorgensen, E.
C. & Vinggaard, A. M. (2005) Gene expression changes in
rat prostate after activation or blocking of the androgen and
estrogen receptor. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 237,
25-35.

Noriega, N. C., Ostby, J., Lambright, C., Wilson, V. S. & Gray,
L. E., Jr (2005) Late gestational exposure to the fungicide
prochloraz delays the onset of parturition and causes repro-
ductive malformations in male but not female rat offspring.
Biology of Reproduction 72, 1324-1335.

O'Connor, J. C., Frame, S. R. & Ladics, G. S. (2002) Evalua-
tion of a 15-day screening assay using intact male rats for
identifying antiandrogens. Toxicological Sciences 69, 92-108.

Pont, A., Williams, P. L., Azhar, S., Reitz, R. E., Bochra, C.,
Smith, E. R. & Stevens, D. A. (1982a) Ketoconazole blocks
testosterone synthesis. Archives of Internal Medicine 142,
2137-2140.

Pont, A., Williams, P. L., Loose, D. S., Feldman, D., Reitz, R.
E., Bochra, C. & Stevens, D. A. (1982b) Ketoconazole blocks
adrenal steroid synthesis. Annals of Internal Medicine 97,
370-372.

Sikka, S. C., Swerdloff, R. S. & Rajfer, J. (1985) In vitro
inhibition of testosterone biosynthesis by ketoconazole.
Endocrinology 116, 1920-1925.

Swan, S. H., Kruse, R. L., Liu, F., Barr, D. B., Drobnis, E. Z.,
Redmon, J. B., Wang, C., Brazil, C. & Overstreet, J. W.

(2003) Semen quality in relation to biomarkers of pesticide
exposure. Environmental Health Perspectives 111, 1478-1484.

Taxvig, C., Hass, U., Axelstad, M., Dalgaard, M., Boberg, J.,

Andersen, H. R. & Vinggaard, A. M. (2007) Endocrine dis-
rupting activities in vivo of the fungicides tebuconazole and
epoxiconazole. Toxicological Sciences, doi: 10.1093/toxsci/
kfm227.

Thompson, D. F. & Carter, J. R. (1993) Drug-induced
gynecomastia. Pharmacotherapy 13, 37-45.

Vinggaard, A. M., Nellemann, C., Dalgaard, M., Jorgensen,
E. B. & Andersen, H. R. (2002) Antiandrogenic effects
in vitro and in vivo of the fungicide prochloraz.
Toxicological Sciences 69, 344-353.

Vinggaard, A. M., Christiansen, S., Laier, P., Poulsen, M. E.,
Breinholt, V., Jarfelt, K., Jacobsen, H., Dalgaard, M.,

Nellemann, C. & Hass, U. (2005a) Perinatal exposure to the
fungicide prochloraz feminizes the male rat offspring.
Toxicological Sciences 85, 886-897.

Vinggaard, A. M., Jacobsen, H., Metzdorff, S. B., Andersen, H.
R. & Nellemann, C. (2005b) Antiandrogenic effects in short-
term in vivo studies of the fungicide fenarimol. Toxicology
207, 21-34.

Weidner, I. S., Moller, H., Jensen, T. K. & Skakkebaek, N. E.
(1998) Cryptorchidism and hypospadias in sons of gardeners
and farmers. Environmental Health Perspectives 106, 793-796.


### Panel discussion

P. Foster

Azole fungicides are used extensively in grape vines. They
were developed to inhibit sterol biosynthesis in fungi and
it is not surprising that they inhibit steroidogenesis in
animals. They are potent P450 inhibitors in fungi and I
assume that is their mode of action as antisteroidogenesis
in animals.


#### C. Nellemann

Yes, they inhibit P450 and have other effects on steroid
biosynthesis.


#### H. Leffers

Denmark is now an approved wine producing country.
Many fungicides such as vinclozolin have antiandrogenic
effects: is this related to their action on fungi? Fungi do
not have androgen receptors (AR), but do the fungicides
affect animal AR?


#### C. Nellemann

I do not know what is the action on AR. They have an
effect on biosynthesis and inhibit P450 in the fungal mem-

<!-- PageFooter="@ 2008 The Authors Journal compilation @ 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . International Journal of Andrology 31, 170-177" -->
<!-- PageNumber="176" -->
<!-- PageFooter="13652605, 2008, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.111 1/j. 1365-2605.2007.00838.x by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [19/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://on linelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="C. Taxvig et al." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Azole fungicides act as endocrine disrupters" -->

brane. This is not a specific effect and will block other
P450-dependent enzyme pathways. It is unclear why the
preferred anti fungal agents only have antiandrogenic
activity, and this may be coincidental. We assume that all
fungicides are endocrine disrupters until proved not to be.


## T. Søeborg

Ketoconazole is a drug in clinical use and therefore will
have been exhaustively tested: its actions will be available
from the producer.


### C. Nellemann

We considered the known effects of ketoconazole in our
studies, but results vary from laboratory to laboratory,
therefore we repeated the tests in our own experiments.


### N.E. Skakkebæk

We have not focused on adrenal effects at this Workshop
but we know from medical endocrinology that ketocona-
zole affects the adrenal gland. Perhaps abnormalities of
adrenocortical steroid biosynthesis should be included in
our studies of hormone disruption.


### C. Nellemann

We use a human adrenal cell line H295R to study steroid
biosynthesis in vitro, and this shows many effects of dif-
ferent treatments. We would like to look more into the
effects of endocrine disruption on the adrenals.


### P. Foster

Have you seen reproductive tract malformations following
treatment with these fungicides?


# C. Nellemann

We have not seen hypospadias, cryptorchidism or differ-
ences in anogenital distance in fungicides other than pro-
chloraz. They are less potent than prochloraz and this
may be a dose effect. We use prochloraz as a positive
control.


# A .- M. Andersson

What is the mechanism of virilisation of female pups
exposed in utero to antiandrogens?


# C. Nellemann

This is also seen with other drugs but we do not know
the mechanism of increased AGD observed with several
of the fungicides. I would like to look at female reproduc-
tive tract development in more detail. We have found
that other antiandrogens do not have this masculinisating
effect on female offspring.


# A. Kortenkamp

Some of the Azole fungicides are AR antagonists in your
in vitro studies but have no effect on genital tract devel-
opment in vivo. Can you explain this apparent lack of
correlation?


# C. Nellemann

There is no direct comparison between in vitro and in
vivo results. When there is evidence of an in vitro antian-
drogen effect this does not give an indication of the in
vivo potency. We were surprised when some of our anti-
androgenic fungicides were negative in the Hersberger in
vivo assay.

<!-- PageFooter="@ 2008 The Authors Journal compilation @ 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . International Journal of Andrology 31, 170-177" -->
<!-- PageNumber="177" -->
<!-- PageFooter="13652605, 2008, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.111 1/j.1365-2605.2007.00838.x by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [19/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley. com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
