<!-- PageHeader="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246 (2013)" -->
<!-- PageHeader="@ 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc." -->


# Original Article


# Species Differences in Developmental Toxicity of Epoxiconazole and Its Relevance to Humans

Steffen Schneider,1 Thomas Hofmann,1 Stefan Stinchcombe,2 Maria Cecilia Rey Moreno,1
Ivana Fegert,2 Volker Strauss,1 Sibylle Gröters,1 Eric Fabian,1 Jutta Thiaener,3 Karma C. Fussell,1
and Bennard van Ravenzwaay1*

1 Experimental Toxicology and Ecology, BASF SE, Ludwigshafen, Germany

2Product Safety, BASF SE, Ludwigshafen, Germany
3Consumer Safety, Residues, BASF SE, Ludwigshafen, Germany

Epoxiconazole, a triazole-based fungicide, was tested in toxicokinetic, prenatal and pre-postnatal toxicity studies in guinea
pigs, following oral (gavage) administration at several dose levels (high dose: 90 mg/kg body weight per day). Maternal
toxicity was evidenced by slightly increased abortion rates and by histopathological changes in adrenal glands, suggest-
ing maternal stress. No compound-related increase in the incidence of malformations or variations was observed in the
prenatal study. In the pre-postnatal study, epoxiconazole did not adversely affect gestation length, parturition, or postna-
tal growth and development. Administration of epoxiconazole did not alter circulating estradiol levels. Histopathological
examination of the placentas did not reveal compound-related effects. The results in guinea pigs are strikingly different
to those observed in pregnant rats, in which maternal estrogen depletion, pathological alteration of placentas, increased
gestation length, late fetal death, and dystocia were observed after administration of epoxiconazole. In the studies re-
ported here, analysis of maternal plasma concentrations and metabolism after administration of radiolabeled epoxicona-
zole demonstrated that the different results in rats and guinea pigs were not due to different exposures of the animals. A
comprehensive comparison of hormonal regulation of pregnancy and birth in murid rodents and primates indicates that
the effects on pregnancy and parturition observed in rats are not applicable to humans. In contrast, the pregnant guinea
pig shares many similarities to pregnant humans regarding hormonal regulation and is therefore considered to be a suit-
able species for extrapolation of related effects to humans. Birth Defects Res (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013.
@ 2013 Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

Key words: Epoxiconazole; prenatal toxicity; postnatal toxicity; species
differences; guinea pig; rat; developmental toxicity


## INTRODUCTION

Epoxiconazole [chemical name: (2RS,3SR)-1-[3-
(2- chlorophenyl)-2,3-epoxy-2-(4-fluorophenyl)-propyl]-
1H-1,2,4-triazole CAS-No. 133855-98-8] is used as an
effective fungicide in agriculture. As with other triazole-
derived fungicides, antifungal activity is mediated
through inhibition of ergosterol biosynthesis. Inhibition
of lanosterol-C14-demethylase (CYP51) leads to accu-
mulation of methylated sterols in the fungal membrane,
thereby impairing its function. However, enzyme in-
hibition is not restricted to CYP51 (a fungal enzyme).
Other enzymes inhibited by triazole fungicides comprise
aromatase (CYP19), which converts androstenedione to
estrogen, and 17a-hydroxylase (CYP17), which converts
progesterone into 17a-hydroxy-progesterone, a precur-
sor of cortisol and androsterone (Goetz et al., 2007).
17a-Hydroxylase also converts pregnenolone into 17a-
pregnenolone, a precursor of dihydroepiandrosterone,
which is further metabolized to estrone and estradiol

by aromatase. Thus, aromatase and 17«-hydroxylase are
key enzymes in steroidogenesis. Inhibition of CYP26
isoenzymes, which are involved in the metabolism of
the morphogen retinoic acid, has also been described
for triazoles and is discussed as a probable mechanism
for the teratogenesis observed with these compounds
(Menegola et al., 2006).

Taxvig et al. (2007) administered epoxiconazole orally
at dose levels of 15 or 50 mg/kg body weight per day to
pregnant rats from gestation day 7 (GD 7) to either GD
21 or to postnatal day 16. Maternal animals had increased

Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this
article.

*Correspondence to: Prof. Dr. Bennard van Ravenzwaay, Experimental
Toxicology and Ecology, BASF SE, 67056 Ludwigshafen, Germany. E-mail:
bennard.ravenzwaay@basf.com

Received 07 December 2012; Accepted 26 February 2013

Published online in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/
bdrb) DOI: 10.1002/bdrb.21058

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="231" -->
<!-- PageHeader="EPOXICONAZOLE TOXICITY-SPECIES DIFFERENCES" -->

gestational length, dystocia, and an increased incidence of
late intrauterine resorptions and stillbirths at 50 mg/kg
body weight per day. Decreased pup weights and in-
creased postnatal deaths were also observed. No toxico-
logically relevant effects were observed at 15 mg/kg body
weight per day. Increased incidences of late intrauterine
resorptions were confirmed in a subsequent study after
oral administration of 50 mg/kg body weight per day
(Stinchcombe et al., 2013). However, the dose of 50 mg/kg
body weight per day also elicited distinct maternal tox-
icity, as shown by reduced corrected body weight, re-
duced food consumption, clear anemia, and almost com-
plete suppression of maternal serum estradiol. Placentas
of fetuses undergoing late resorption showed degenera-
tive changes of the labyrinth and trophospongium (Rey
Moreno et al., 2013). These results indicate that intrauter-
ine resorptions are not caused by a specific embryo-
fetotoxic effect of epoxiconazole, but rather due to a
maternally mediated effect at toxic dose levels on the
placentas, which are no longer able to adequately nour-
ish the fetuses. Both the increased incidence of late re-
sorptions and degeneration of the placentas could be pre-
vented by maternal supplementation with estrogen (Rey
Moreno et al., 2013; Stinchcombe et al., 2013). However,
this supplementation did not prevent the other mater-
nally toxic effects of epoxiconazole, that is, reduced body
weight gain and anemia. Therefore, it is evident that estra-
diol homeostasis plays a critical role in epoxiconazole me-
diated late intrauterine resorptions, and that these effects
are due to aromatase inhibition in rats.

The rat, as a model for effects mediated by aromatase
inihibition, has been criticized as a species that is not rel-
evant for humans (Scientific Committee on Plants, 1999);
instead, the guinea pig was recommended as a suitable
species for assessing human risk. More recently, the appli-
cability of the guinea pig for regulatory reproductive tox-
icology testing has also been acknowledged (Rocca and
Wehner, 2009).

Few publications from the last decades reviewed the
characteristics of guinea pig reproductive biology in com-
parison to a variety of species including humans. There
is general consensus that the guinea pig, which displays
several key physiological characteristics of gestation that
more closely resemble human pregnancy than do cur-
rently established standard animal models, is a valid
alternative to murid rodents. Examples of these phys-
iological characteristics comprise hormonal regulation
(Batra et al., 1980; Hobkirk and Glasier, 1993), placen-
tation (Carter, 2007), and parturition (Mitchell and Tag-
gart, 2009). As in humans, the guinea pig placenta is
hemomonochorial (Enders, 1965; Carter and Enders, 2004;
Carter, 2007) and the trophoblast invades extensively into
the endometrium.

Therefore, the guinea pig was used in the present stud-
ies as an alternative animal model for developmental and
reproductive toxicity. These studies were performed to ex-
amine whether the effects of epoxiconazole on the hor-
monal regulation of pregnancy, placenta morphology, em-
bryonic/fetal development, and parturition as previously
described in rats were species-specific.

Three studies were performed in guinea pigs to address
endpoints during gestation and early postnatal develop-
ment:

(1) A toxicokinetic study in pregnant guinea pigs to es-
tablish plasma levels and metabolite profiles after oral
administration of radiolabeled epoxiconazole.

(2) A prenatal toxicity study with endpoints measuring
maternal and fetotoxicity terminated by cesarean sec-
tion.

(3) A pre-postnatal toxicity study with endpoints exam-
ining maternal toxicity, gestation length, parturition,
and postnatal development until weaning.


## MATERIAL AND METHODS


### General

All studies except analyses of hormone levels were con-
ducted according to the OECD Principles of Good Lab-
oratory Practice (OECD, 1992), which principally meet
the United States Environmental Protection Agency Good
Laboratory Practice Standards [40 CFR Part 160 (FIFRA)
and Part 792 (TSCA)].

The toxicokinetic study was performed according to
OECD Guideline 417 (OECD, 2010). The design of the
modified prenatal study followed OECD Guideline 414
and EPA OPPTS 870.3700 (US EPA, 1998; OECD, 2001),
the pre- and postnatal toxicity study was performed re-
ferring to ICH S5A, Section 4.1.2 (ICH, 2005), but termi-
nated 3 weeks after weaning. In the latter two studies, the
treatment periods were adapted to the longer gestation
period of the guinea pig, which takes approximately 69
days rather than 21 days in rats.


### Test Compound

Epoxiconazole
((2RS,3SR)-1-[3-(2-chlorophenyl)-
2,3-epoxy-2-(4-fluorophenyl)-propyl]-1H-1,2,4-triazole),
batch COD-001118, was obtained from BASF (Lud-
wigshafen, Germany) and had a purity of >97%.

In addition to the unlabeled batch, 14C-labeled epoxi-
conazole with a radiochemical purity of 99.9% was used
in the toxicokinetic study. It was mixed with the non-
labeled substance to yield a specific activity of about
1 MBq/mg (5 and 15 mg/kg body weight per day) or
0.5 MBeq/mg (50 and 90 mg/kg body weight per day),
respectively.

Dosing formulations of epoxiconazole were prepared
with 1% carboxymethylcellulose suspension in highly
deionized water.


### Test Animals

The studies were performed in an AAALAC-approved
laboratory in accordance with the German Animal Wel-
fare Act and the effective European Council Directive.
Dunkin-Hartley guinea pigs (Crl:HA) were supplied by
Charles River Laboratories, Research Models and Ser-
vices, Germany GmbH. Only animals free from clinical
signs of disease were used for the investigations.

In the toxicokinetic study and the prenatal toxicity
study, the breeder paired female guinea pigs on the day
after they had given birth to a litter, using the postpar-
tal estrus to obtain time-mated animals. Thus, no nulli-
parous females were used in these experiments. In the
pre-postnatal toxicity study BASF Experimental Toxicol-
ogy and Ecology Laboratories mated female guinea pigs
in the estrous phase with a male partner for several hours

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2013, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.21058 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="232" -->
<!-- PageHeader="SCHNEIDER ET AL." -->

(morning or afternoon pairing) until copulation was
observed.

Guinea pigs were housed individually on dust-free
wooden bedding in type H-Temp (PSU) cages supplied by
Tecniplast, Germany (floor area about 2065 cm2), in fully
air-conditioned rooms with a range of temperature of
20-24℃ and a range of relative humidity of 30-70%. The
air exchange rate was 15 times per hour. The day/night
cycle was generally 12 hr (12 hr light from 6:00 AM to 18:00
PM and 12 hr darkness from 18:00 PM to 6:00 AM). Food
(pelleted Kliba maintenance diet rabbits and guinea pigs,
"GLP" meal, supplied by Provimi Kliba SA, Kaiseraugst,
Switzerland) and drinking water (supplied from water
bottles) was available to the animals ad libitum through-
out the study.


### Experimental Procedure

Toxicokinetic study. Groups of six pregnant guinea
pigs received unlabeled epoxiconazole orally via gav-
age daily from GD 6 to GD 9 at dose levels of 5, 15,
50, or 90 mg/kg body weight, followed by administra-
tion of radiolabeled substance on GD 10. The dose vol-
ume was 10 ml/kg body weight, the animals were not
fasted before treatment. Blood samples (approximately
100 µL) were taken from the ear vein (at 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8,
24, 48, and 72 hr) or by exsanguination under isoflurane
anesthesia (96 hrs) after administration of radiolabeled
epoxiconazole.

The total radioactivity in plasma was determined using
liquid scintillation counting after mixing the samples with
appropriate amounts of Hionic Fluor cocktail. Analysis
of the kinetic data (Cmax, AUC, half-life) was performed
using the PC program system TOPFIT, version 2.0. Only
pregnant animals were used for evaluation.

For metabolite profiling, pooled plasma samples were
prepared by combining equal volumes from each ani-
mal of a certain dose group for the respective time peri-
ods, and the total radioactive residues in the pooled sam-
ples were measured. Proteins were precipitated from the
pooled plasma samples with acidified acetonitrile, and
the protein precipitates were incubated with proteases.
The supernatants after protein precipitation and the sol-
ubilized residues after protease treatment were analyzed
by LSC and HPLC. Separation of peaks was performed
via gradient elution on reversed-phase columns or on a
HILIC column.

Prenatal toxicity study. Groups of 30 mated guinea
pigs received epoxiconazole orally via gavage once daily
from implantation to sacrifice (GD 6 to GD 63) at dose
levels of 0 (vehicle, 1% aqueous carboxymethylcellulose),
15, 50, or 90 mg/kg body weight at a dose volume of
10 mL/kg body weight. The high dose was chosen as
half the lethal dose that was determined in a preliminary
study. Clinical signs, body weights, and food consump-
tion were recorded regularly throughout the study. On
GD 63, blood samples for hematological examinations,
clinical chemistry, and hormone analyses were obtained
from all surviving animals by puncturing the retrobulbar
venous plexus under isoflurane anesthesia. Thereafter the
females were sacrificed and examined macroscopically.
Uteri and ovaries were removed. Gravid uterus weights
and corrected body weight gain of the dams (terminal

body weight minus gravid uterus weight minus body
weight on GD 6) were determined. The number of cor-
pora lutea, as well as the number, status, and distribution
of implantation sites (live fetuses, early resorptions, late
resorptions, dead fetuses) were also determined. Concep-
tion rate, preimplantation loss (%), and postimplantation
loss (%) were calculated using the litter as unit in the lat-
ter two parameters. Placental diameters were measured
during gross pathological assessment.

The adrenal glands, liver, and ovaries were weighed.
Thereafter, the adrenal glands, liver, ovaries, and placen-
tas including the uterine wall were fixed in 4% buffered
formaldehyde solution. After 24-48 hr, the placentas were
removed from 4% formaldehyde solution and transferred
to 70% ethanol for asservation. All ovaries and placentas
were processed for histological examination, stained with
hematoxylin-eosin, and examined by light microscopy.
For visualization, the placentas were trimmed by a trans-
verse cut through the center (parallel to the umbilical
cord) to obtain a section visualizing the different pla-
cental zones including the subplacenta. Similarly, the
ovaries were trimmed by a longitudinal cut through in the
center.

The fetuses were removed from the uterus, sacrificed
by subcutaneous injection of pentobarbital (Narcoren®;
dose: 0.5 mL/fetus), examined for externally visible
anomalies, sexed, and then sectioned. During this final
part of the examination, the heart and kidneys were sec-
tioned to evaluate their internal structure. The heads of
approximately one-half of the fetuses per litter and of
those fetuses that revealed severe externally visible find-
ings were severed from the trunk, fixed in Bouin's so-
lution, processed, and evaluated according to Wilson's
method (Wilson, 1965). About 10 transverse sections were
prepared per head.

All fetuses were skinned, fixed in ethanol, and stained
according to a modified method of Kimmel and Tram-
mell (1981). Thereafter, the stained skeleton of each fe-
tus was examined morphologically referring to the glos-
sary of Wise et al. (1997) and its updated version of
Makris et al. (2009). Classifications of findings were based
on terms and definitions proposed by the "Berlin Work-
shops" (Chahoud et al., 1999; Solecki et al., 2001, 2003)
and divided into the categories malformations (perma-
nent structural changes, likely adversely affecting sur-
vival or health) and variations (changes that may spon-
taneously occur and considered unlikely to adversely
affect survival or health). Fetal findings not classifiable as
malformation or variation were described as "unclassified
observations."

Pre- and postnatal toxicity study. Parental (F0)
generation. Groups of 25 to 27 pregnant animals received
epoxiconazole orally by gavage once daily from implan-
tation (GD 6) through 1 day before necropsy (shortly
after postnatal day 21) at 0 (vehicle, 1% aqueous car-
boxymethylcellulose), 15, 50, or 90 mg/kg body weight.
The dose volume was 10 ml/kg body weight. Clini-
cal signs, body weights, and food consumption were
recorded regularly throughout the study. At necropsy,
blood samples for hematological examinations, clini-
cal chemistry, and hormone analyses were obtained
from all surviving parental females by puncturing the
retrobulbar venous plexus under isoflurane anesthesia.

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2013, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.21058 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="233" -->
<!-- PageHeader="EPOXICONAZOLE TOXICITY-SPECIES DIFFERENCES" -->

Thereafter the females were sacrificed and examined
macroscopically.

Adrenal glands, brain, kidneys, liver, ovaries, pituitary
gland, spleen, thyroid glands (with parathyroid glands),
and uteri were weighed and preserved in 4% formalde-
hyde solution or modified Davidson's solution (ovaries).
Additionally, all gross lesions, cervix uteri, oviducts, thy-
roid glands (including parathyroid glands), and vagina
were preserved in 4% formaldehyde solution. The adrenal
glands, cervix uteri, ovaries, oviducts, pituitary glands,
uterus, vagina, and all gross lesions were processed for
histological examination, stained with hematoxylin-eosin,
and examined by light microscopy.

F1 generation. All pups delivered from the Fo parents
(F1 litter) were examined as soon as possible on the day
of birth to determine the total number of pups and the
number of live-born and stillborn pups in each litter. All
pups, which died before this initial examination, were de-
fined as stillborn pups. From these data, the gestation in-
dex, live birth index, postimplantation loss, viability in-
dex, and lactation index were calculated. The sex ratio
of the pups was determined at birth and confirmed at
necropsy.

All pups were observed daily for clinical signs and
weighed at birth and weekly thereafter. On postnatal
day 21, the pups were sacrificed under isoflurane anes-
thesia with CO2. After sacrifice, all pups were exam-
ined externally, eviscerated, and their organs assessed
macroscopically.


### Clinical Pathology

Hematological parameters were measured with an Ad-
via 120 instrument (Bayer, Fernwald, Germany); these
comprised red blood cell counts, hemoglobin, hematocrit,
mean corpuscular volume, mean corpuscular hemoglobin
content, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration,
reticulocyte, platelet, total white blood cell counts as well
as the differential blood cell count.

Clinical chemistry parameters were measured with
an Hitachi 917 instrument (Roche, Mannheim, Ger-
many) and consisted of alanine aminotransferase,
aspartate aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase,
y-glutamyltransferase, inorganic phosphate, calcium,
urea, creatinine, glucose, total bilirubin, total protein,
albumin, globulins, triglycerides, and cholesterol.

Steroid hormones were analyzed. Estradiol was mea-
sured via ELISA after an ether extraction (extraction effi-
ciency >86%; lowest quantifiable value 2 pmol/L) using
a Sunrise MTP-reader, Tecan AG, Maennedorf, Switzer-
land, and evaluated with the Magellan Software provided
by the instrument manufacturer. In addition, the con-
centrations of 11-deoxycorticosterone, 11-deoxycortisol,
18-hydroxycorticosterone, aldosterone (pre-postnatal
study only), androstendione, corticosterone, cortisol,
dihydrotestosterone (pre-postnatal study only), proges-
terone, and testosterone were measured at Metanomics
GmbH, Tegeler Weg 33, 10589 Berlin, Germany, by
an in-house online solid-phase extraction-LC-MS/MS
(SPE-LC-MS/MS) method. Absolute quantification was
performed using stable isotope-labeled standards (lowest
quantifiable value: 11-deoxycorticosterone, aldosterone,
dihydrotestosterone = 0.5 ng/ml; other hormones =
0.1 ng/ml).


## Statistics

The data for food consumption, maternal, litter, and
post-weaning body weight and body weight change, car-
cass and gravid uterus weight, duration of gestation,
number of corpora lutea and implantations, number of
resorptions, number of live fetuses, percent pre- and
postimplantation loss, percent live fetuses per litter, num-
ber of pups per litter, postimplantation loss, live birth, vi-
ability, and lactation indices were analyzed by the two-
sided Dunnett's test for the hypothesis of equal means
(Dunnett, 1955, 1964). The female mortality, number of
pregnant females, and number of litters with fetal find-
ings, were analyzed by pairwise comparison of each dose
group with the control group using the one-sided Fisher's
exact test for the hypothesis of equal proportions (Siegel,
1956). Gestation index, number of females with live-born
and stillborn pups, females with stillborn pups only, still-
born pups, pup mortality data, and number of litters with
affected pups at necropsy were analyzed by a one-sided
Dunnett's test for the hypothesis of equal means (Siegel,
1956). The proportion of fetuses per litter with findings
was analyzed by pairwise comparison of each dose group
with the control group by a one-sided Wilcoxon test for
the hypothesis of equal medians (Nijenhuis and Wilf,
1978; Miller, 1981; Hettmansberger, 1984). Hematology
and clinical chemistry parameters were analyzed by pair-
wise comparison of each dose group with the control
group using a two-sided Kruskall-Wallis test, followed by
a two-sided Wilcoxon test for the hypothesis of equal me-
dians in case of p < 0.05 (Siegel, 1956). Hormone concen-
trations were analyzed by pairwise comparison of each
dose group with the control group using a two-sided
Kruskall-Wallis test, followed by a two-sided Mann-
Whitney U-test in case of p < 0.05 (Siegel, 1956). Organ
weights were compared among groups by nonparametric
one-way analysis using the two-sided Kruskal-Wallis test,
followed by a two-sided Wilcoxon test for the hypothesis
of equal medians in case of p < 0.05 (Nijenhuis and Wilf,
1978; Miller, 1981; Hettmansperger, 1984).


## RESULTS General

Preparations of the test compound in the
vehicle. Homogeneity, stability, and concentration of
unlabeled and radiolabeled epoxiconazole were demon-
strated for all groups during the toxicokinetic study.

Regarding the prenatal and pre- and postnatal tox-
icity studies, the stability and homogeneity of the
test substance suspensions in the vehicle (1% car-
boxymethylcellulose suspension in highly deionized
water) over a period of 7 days at room temper-
ature was demonstrated. The results of these ana-
lyses of the test-substance suspensions also confirmed the
correctness of the prepared concentrations. Generally, the
analytical values of the samples corresponded to the ex-
pected values and were above 90% and below 110% of the
nominal concentrations.


## Toxicokinetic Study

Plasma radioactivity. The toxicokinetic parameters
are summarized in Table 1 and Figure 1.

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2013, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.21058 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="234" -->
<!-- PageHeader="SCHNEIDER ET AL." -->


<table>
<caption>Table 1 Toxicokinetic Parameters in Pregnant Guinea Pigs after 4 Administrations of Unlabeled Epoxiconazole (GD 6-9) and Radiolabeled Epoxiconazole on GD 10</caption>
<tr>
<th>Dose EPX (mg/kg bw/day)</th>
<th>5</th>
<th>15</th>
<th>50</th>
<th>90</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cmax (hr)</td>
<td>0.59</td>
<td>1.69</td>
<td>5.04</td>
<td>8.54</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tmax (hr)</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>T1/2 terminal (hr)</td>
<td>45.16</td>
<td>36.75</td>
<td>41.97</td>
<td>35.60</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>AUC (µg Eq/gxh)</td>
<td>31.91</td>
<td>64.47</td>
<td>352.63</td>
<td>484.45</td>
</tr>
</table>


Both Cmax and AUCo-& increased with rising dose level
in an approximately dose-proportional manner. Terminal
elimination half-life values ranged from 36 to 45 hr.

Metabolites. The supernatants from plasma sam-
pled 0.5 to 8 hr after dosing showed metabolite pat-
terns with two main components, the unchanged parent
compound epoxiconazole and the metabolite 480M52, ac-
companied by lower portions of the metabolites 480M13,
480M60, 480M05, 480M54 (or respective isomers), and
480M02 (and its isomer 480M26). In the supernatants from
plasma sampled 24 to 96 hr after application, the parent
compound was no longer present, and the portions of the
metabolite 480M02 and/or its isomer 480M26, and partic-
ularly of the metabolite 480M52 had increased.

In all protease solubilizates from the protein precipi-
tates, the metabolite 480M06 represented the main com-
ponent. 480M06 residue levels increased with the dose
level rising from 5 to 50 mg/kg body weight per day, but
were relatively lower at 90 mg/kg body weight per day.
The parent compound epoxiconazole was only detected
in two protease solubilizates in low portions. The metabo-
lite 480M52 was found in both types of plasma fractions
(Table 2).

The total concentrations of the parent compound epox-
iconazole, the metabolite 480M52, and the sums of the
conversion products of epoxiconazole calculated from the

two analyzed fractions of all pooled plasma samples are
compiled in Table 3.

The concentrations of epoxiconazole in the pooled
samples of plasma collected 0.5 to 8 hr after applica-
tion increased with dose, but the relative portion of
epoxiconazole was considerably higher in plasma at
90 mg/kg body weight per day. In plasma sampled
24 to 96 hr after administration, no parent compound
was detected any more. These data indicate a lim-
ited degradation of epoxiconazole at 90 mg/kg body
weight per day during the first 8 hr after adminis-
tration. The concentrations of the metabolite 480M52
and the sums of all conversion products of epox-
iconazole showed an approximately dose-dependent
increase.

Metabolic pathway. The proposed metabolic path-
way of epoxiconazole following administration by oral
gavage to pregnant guinea pigs is shown in Figure 2.

The metabolic pathway of epoxiconazole in pregnant
guinea pigs was in good accordance with the pathway re-
ported for pregnant Wistar rats (Thiaener et al., 2011) with
the only exception that a peak corresponding to metabo-
lite 480M54 was additionally identified in plasma of preg-
nant guinea pigs.


## Prenatal Toxicity Study

Mortality and clinical signs. Abortion or early
delivery occurred in all groups including controls (4, 2,
2, 2 animals in control and ascending dose groups, re-
spectively). Two guinea pigs at 50 and 90 mg/kg body
weight per day, respectively, were sacrificed in mori-
bund condition. Two animals at 50 mg/kg body weight
per day were found dead, and one animal dosed with
15 mg/kg body weight per day died during administra-
tion. In the absence of dose dependency, none of these
mortalities were considered to be related to epoxiconazole
treatment.


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 1. Plasma radioactivity in pregnant guinea pigs after administration of 14℃ epoxiconazole.</figcaption>

Diagrammbereich

Plasma radioactivity after administration of 14C-Epoxiconazole

9

5 mg/kg bw/day

-- 15 mg/kg bw/day

-- 50 mg/kg bw/day

90 mg/kg bw/day

8

7

6

ug / Eq./g plasma

5

4

3

2

1

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Time post dosing on GD10 [h]

</figure>


<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2013, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.21058 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="235" -->
<!-- PageHeader="EPOXICONAZOLE TOXICITY-SPECIES DIFFERENCES" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 2 Identification of Radioactive Residues from Pooled Plasma Samples</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">mg/kg bw/day</th>
<th rowspan="2">Pooled time points</th>
<th colspan="2">Epoxiconazole</th>
<th rowspan="2">480M52 %TRR</th>
<th rowspan="2">480M13/480M60ª %TRR</th>
<th rowspan="2">480M05/480M54b %TRR</th>
<th rowspan="2">480M02/480M26℃ %TRR</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>µg/mL</th>
<th>%TRR</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="7">In supernatants after protein precipitation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5</td>
<td>0.5-8 hr</td>
<td>0.077</td>
<td>15.4</td>
<td>14.1</td>
<td>4.2</td>
<td>8.2 + 7.5 =15.7</td>
<td>4.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>15</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.184</td>
<td>11.2</td>
<td>15.7</td>
<td>4.7</td>
<td>8.1 + 10.0 =18.1</td>
<td>3.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>50</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.501</td>
<td>11.6</td>
<td>13.6</td>
<td>7.0</td>
<td>(6.1 + 1.3) + 9.9 =17.3</td>
<td>4.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>90</td>
<td></td>
<td>2.604</td>
<td>34.0</td>
<td>15.3</td>
<td>3.3</td>
<td>(5.1 +1.0 + 0.6) +7.3 =14.0</td>
<td>4.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5</td>
<td>24-96 hr</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>15</td>
<td></td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>50</td>
<td></td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>30.3</td>
<td>2.1</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>9.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>90</td>
<td></td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>34.6</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>16.1</td>
</tr>
</table>


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">mg/kg bw/day</th>
<th colspan="3" rowspan="2">Epoxiconazole Pooled time points ug/mL %TRR</th>
<th rowspan="2">480M52 %TRR</th>
<th rowspan="2">480M06 %TRR</th>
<th colspan="2">Sum of HPLC peaks eluting</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>10-28 min %TRR</th>
<th>31-57 min %TRR</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="7">In solubilizates after protease treatment of protein precipitates</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5</td>
<td>0.5-8 hr</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>4.7</td>
<td>7.6</td>
<td>12.8</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>15</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.015</td>
<td>0.9</td>
<td>2.4</td>
<td>5.9</td>
<td>7.8</td>
<td>3.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>50</td>
<td></td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>20.5</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>7.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>90</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.130</td>
<td>1.7</td>
<td>2.1</td>
<td>3.8</td>
<td>9.6</td>
<td>0.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5</td>
<td>24-96 hr</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>15</td>
<td></td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>10.5</td>
<td>15.5</td>
<td>22.0</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>50</td>
<td></td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>4.9</td>
<td>29.4</td>
<td>6.5</td>
<td>5.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>90</td>
<td></td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>n.d.</td>
<td>4.5</td>
<td>11.5</td>
<td>22.2</td>
<td>6.3</td>
</tr>
</table>

%TRR, radioactivity contained in an individual fraction compared to the total radioactive residue in the particular sample/matrix
processed. n.d., not detected; this measurement was below the lower limit of detection.

a%TRR for 480M13 or/and isomers or/and 480M60.

b%TRR for 480M05/480M54 represents a sum resulting from peaks that were identified in the report either as "480M05 or/and isomers"
or "480M05 or/and isomers or/and 480M54."

c%TRR for 480M02 or/and its isomer 480M26.


<table>
<caption>Table 3 Summary of the Total Concentrations of Radioactive Residues, of Unchanged Parent Compound, of Metabolite 480M52 (1,2,4-Triazole) and the Sums of Conversion Products of 14C-Epoxiconazole Detected in Pooled Plasma Samples from Pregnant Guinea Pigs Treated with Epoxiconazole</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">mg/kg bw/day</th>
<th rowspan="2">Pooled time points</th>
<th colspan="2">14℃ residues in plasma (TRR)</th>
<th colspan="2">Epoxiconazole</th>
<th colspan="2">480M52</th>
<th colspan="2">Sum of conversion products of epoxiconazole</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>µg/mL</th>
<th>%TRR</th>
<th>µg/mL</th>
<th>%TRR</th>
<th>µg/mL</th>
<th>%TRR</th>
<th>µg/mL</th>
<th>%TRR</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5</td>
<td>0.5-8 hr</td>
<td>0.502</td>
<td>100%</td>
<td>0.077</td>
<td>15.4%</td>
<td>0.094</td>
<td>18.8%</td>
<td>0.394</td>
<td>78.4%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>15</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.640</td>
<td>100%</td>
<td>0.198</td>
<td>12.1%</td>
<td>0.296</td>
<td>18.1%</td>
<td>1.149</td>
<td>70.1%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>50</td>
<td></td>
<td>4.305</td>
<td>100%</td>
<td>0.501</td>
<td>11.6%</td>
<td>0.587</td>
<td>13.6%</td>
<td>3.876</td>
<td>90.0%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>90</td>
<td></td>
<td>7.651</td>
<td>100%</td>
<td>2.734</td>
<td>35.7%</td>
<td>1.333</td>
<td>17.4%</td>
<td>4.971</td>
<td>65.0%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5</td>
<td>24-96 hr</td>
<td>0.198</td>
<td>100%</td>
<td>0.000</td>
<td>0.0%</td>
<td>0.000</td>
<td>0.0%</td>
<td>0.176</td>
<td>89.1%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>15</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.534</td>
<td>100%</td>
<td>0.000</td>
<td>0.0%</td>
<td>0.056</td>
<td>10.5%</td>
<td>0.462</td>
<td>86.5%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>50</td>
<td></td>
<td>2.522</td>
<td>100%</td>
<td>0.000</td>
<td>0.0%</td>
<td>0.889</td>
<td>35.3%</td>
<td>2.441</td>
<td>96.8%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>90</td>
<td></td>
<td>3.658</td>
<td>100%</td>
<td>0.000</td>
<td>0.0%</td>
<td>1.430</td>
<td>39.1%</td>
<td>3.547</td>
<td>97.0%</td>
</tr>
</table>

%TRR, radioactivity contained in an individual fraction compared to the total radioactive residue in the particular sample/matrix
processed.


No compound-related clinical signs were observed. Re-
duced or no defecation occurred in all groups includ-
ing controls (1, 2, 1, 2 animals in control and ascending
dose groups, respectively). One animal at 90 mg/kg body
weight per day showed reduced nutritional state, vaginal
hemorrhage, and piloerection.

Body weight and food consumption. Body
weight development (Suppl. Fig. S1) and food consump-

tion (Fig. S2) were not influenced by the treatment during
the study. Likewise, average carcass weight and corrected
body weight gain were not influenced by the treatment
during the study.

Hematology, clinical chemistry, and hormone
measurements. The following significant alterations
were observed: decreased red blood cell counts (-6%),
hematocrit (-8%), and hemoglobin (-6%) concentrations,

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="236" -->
<!-- PageHeader="SCHNEIDER ET AL." -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 2. Metabolic pathway of epoxiconazole in pregnant guinea pigs.</figcaption>

N

N

O

N

CI

N

BAS 480 F

480M52

F

F

480M06

OH

N

CI

F

480M02 or / and its isomer 480M26

OH

OH

N

CI

N

CI

OH OH

OH S

O

H2N

OH

F

F

480M05 or/and isomers

480M13 or/and isomers

OH

OH

N

CI

N

CI

OHO-GICA

OH S-CH3

F

F

(or isomeric glucuronide)

480M54

480M60

</figure>


as well as lower total bilirubin and cholesterol levels were
observed in guinea pigs at 90 mg/kg body weight per day.

Dose-dependent significant increases in androstene-
dione, testosterone, and 11-deoxycortisol serum levels
were measured in all dose groups. In addition, guinea
pigs of the high dose group had significantly higher
18-hydroxycorticosterone and corticosterone serum lev-
els (Table 4). The apparent lower estradiol levels in the
treated groups were caused by an artificially high control
mean that was generated by just one animal which had a
100-fold higher level than the rest of the group (individ-
ual data shown in Table S1). If this outlier was excluded,
the means were comparable in all groups: 6.83, 3.08, 4.1,
and 5.32 pmol/L.

Cesarean section, necropsy, and histopathol-
ogy. Gravid uterus weights were not influenced by the
treatment (Table 5). No compound-related macroscopic
findings were observed at necropsy. The mean number
of implantation sites, pre- and postimplantation loss were
comparable in all groups. No dead fetuses were noted.

The sex distribution of the fetuses was comparable
in all groups. Mean fetal weights did not show any

biologically relevant differences between the test
substance-treated groups and the control (Table 6).

The absolute and relative adrenal gland weights
were slightly, but statistically significantly higher at
90 mg/kg body weight per day. In addition, the mean
relative liver weight was significantly higher at both
50 and 90 mg/kg/day, but without dose dependency
(Table 7).

A microscopic examination of ovaries and placentas did
not reveal any compound-related effect. The diameters
of the placentas were comparable across all groups (28.0,
28.6, 27.6, 28.3 mm in control and ascending dose groups,
respectively).

Fetal morphology examinations. Malforma-
tions. Fetal malformations are summarized in Table 8
(for a list of all findings, see Table S2). Umbilical hernia
was the only external malformation that was recorded
in the fetuses of all dose groups including the controls.
Umbilical hernia occurred at litter incidences of 1, 1, 2,
and 3 in controls and ascending dose groups, respectively.
The presence of this finding in control animals and the
low general incidence indicate that there is no evidence
of a specific effect of the test substance on complete
closure of abdominal wall at the umbilical ring. While the
lack of sufficient historical data available in guinea pigs
makes assessment difficult, this finding does not appear
to be uncommon. A recent reference (Rocca and Wehner,
2009) also describes the presence of omphalocele, a
distinct form of umbilical hernia, in four different Dunkin
Hartley fetuses from three separate litters of 32 control
litters. Another case of omphalocele was reported for
one control fetus in a second study from the same group
(Wehner et al., 2009). Thus, a relationship of this finding
to treatment in the present study seems to be rather
unlikely.

No malformations were observed by soft tissue
examination.

Malformations of the fetal skeletons were recorded in
the fetuses of all groups. For neither the individual find-
ings nor the overall incidences was a dose-response re-
lationship present. Thus, these findings were considered
to be spontaneous in nature and without a relation to
treatment.

Since the incidence of total external, soft tissue and
skeletal malformations showed no dose-response rela-
tionship, there was no evidence of a compound-related
effect.

Variations. Fetal variations are summarized in Table 9
(for a list of all findings, see Table S3). No variations were
observed by external examination of the fetuses.

Variations observed by soft tissue examinations con-
sisted of malpositioned carotid origin and were detected
in the low- and mid-dose groups as well as the control
group. As there was no dose-response relationship, these
findings were considered to be spontaneous in nature and
without a relation to treatment.

Variations in different skeletal structures were detected
with or without effects on the corresponding cartilage.
Skeletal variations consisted primarily of minor delays
or disturbances of ossification. The majority of skeletal
variations were equally distributed among the different
groups. However, two skeletal variations, a fusion of
the thoracic centrum and thoracic arch and a misshapen

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="EPOXICONAZOLE TOXICITY-SPECIES DIFFERENCES" -->
<!-- PageNumber="237" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 4 Prenatal Toxicity Study: Hormone Concentrations in Guinea Pigs, Gestation Day 63 (Individual Values, See Table S1)</caption>
<tr>
<th>Dose EPX (mg/kg bw/day)</th>
<th>0 (Vehicle)</th>
<th>15</th>
<th>50</th>
<th>90</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Number of samples</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>18</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>11-Deoxycorticosterone (nmol/L)</td>
<td>250 ± 104</td>
<td>220 ± 123</td>
<td>220 ± 100</td>
<td>255 ± 100</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18-Hydroxycorticosterone (nmol/L)</td>
<td>0.47 ± 0.23</td>
<td>0.48 ± 0.17</td>
<td>0.55 ± 0.28</td>
<td>0.73 ± 0.31 **</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Androstenedione (nmol/L)</td>
<td>9.09 ± 3.76</td>
<td>14.26 ± 7.35*</td>
<td>17.05 ± 9.48"</td>
<td>16.93 ± 7.63</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Corticosterone (nmol/L)</td>
<td>62.38 ± 36.63</td>
<td>62.89 ± 23.60</td>
<td>76.57 ± 41.00</td>
<td>89.70 ± 27.80 **</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cortisol (nmol/L)</td>
<td>8300 ± 2419</td>
<td>7954 ± 2020</td>
<td>8214 ± 2647</td>
<td>8682 ± 2100</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Estradiol (pmol/L)</td>
<td>18.70 ± 57.98</td>
<td>3.08 ± 0.13</td>
<td>4.10 ± 0.45</td>
<td>5.32 ± 14.63</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Progesterone (nmol/L)</td>
<td>820 ± 299</td>
<td>889 ± 287</td>
<td>876 ± 286</td>
<td>799 ± 242</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Testosterone (nmol/L)</td>
<td>0.63 ± 0.19</td>
<td>0.89 ± 0.40*</td>
<td>1.12 ± 0.34 **</td>
<td>1.25 ± 0.41 **</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>11-Deoxycortisol (nmol/L)</td>
<td>34.90 ± 14.35</td>
<td>50.39 ± 23.64*</td>
<td>75.71 ± 63.03</td>
<td>126.26 ± 99.90*</td>
</tr>
</table>

*p ≤ 0.05; ** p ≤ 0.01 [Kruskal-Wallis test plus Wilcoxon test (estradiol) or Mann-Whitney U-test (other hormones)]. Means ± SD are
shown.


<table>
<caption>Table 5 Prenatal Toxicity Study: Gravid Uterus Weights and Maternal Body Weight Change</caption>
<tr>
<th>Dose EPX (mg/kg bw/day)</th>
<th>0 (Vehicle)</th>
<th>15</th>
<th>50</th>
<th>90</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N</th>
<th>23</th>
<th>22</th>
<th>19</th>
<th>19</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Gravid uterus (g)</td>
<td>417.8 ± 146.70</td>
<td>401.2 ± 142.39</td>
<td>393.1 ± 91.23</td>
<td>392.1 ±158.31</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Carcass (g)</td>
<td>858.4 ±123.20</td>
<td>865.5 ± 62.33</td>
<td>883.9 ± 113.73</td>
<td>852.9 ± 84.43</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net weight change from day 6 (g)</td>
<td>41.0 ± 107.56</td>
<td>52.2 ± 64.80</td>
<td>58.3 ± 69.27</td>
<td>30.3 ± 68.16</td>
</tr>
</table>

*p ≤ 0.05; ** p ≤ 0.01 (two-sided Dunnett test). Means ± SD are shown.


sternebra were noted at statistically significantly higher
incidences.

Early ossification of the thoracic vertebral centrum
and neural arches is likely to represent an advancement
in the ossification and development of the vertebrae.
These changes should occur normally in the ossification
of the vertebrae as development proceeds postnatally. A
cartilaginous joint between the centrum and vertebral
arches is present at birth in humans, but the cartilagi-
nous regions ossify allowing the vertebra (consisting
of a body and a neural arch) to become a single bone
around 3 to 6 years of age (Moore and Persaud, 2008).
This process is similar in rats and rabbits and should
be the same in the guinea pig, but we could not find
specific information regarding the timing of the process
in this species. Because this fusion is part of the normal
process of vertebral development, it is unclear why
these changes would have occurred more frequently as
the dose increased in this study. The weight of fetuses
in each group was similar and the litter sizes, though
variable, were similar across all treatment groups, both
of which can influence the degree of ossification. It
is probable that this process begins around the time
of birth in guinea pigs (fusions were noted in seven
control fetuses); if so, there is likely to be a good deal of
variability in the timing of ossification of the connection
between the centrum and vertebral arches. This type of
variability can be seen in several bones of rat fetuses
that are ossifying around the time of birth, for example,
the sternebrae, vertebral centra, and the carpals/tarsals,
metacarpals/metatarsals, and phalanges. One may
conclude that these minor changes in the ossification
process, which occur very frequently in rat and rabbit
fetuses, seem also to be common skeletal abnormali-
ties in guinea pigs. Rocca and Wehner (2009) reported

skeletal abnormalities such as short rib, discontinuous
rib, supernumerary rib, unossified vertebra, bipartite
ossification, and extra sites of ossification in 35 to 50% of
litters (9.6-24.7% of fetuses) examined. An increase of this
spontaneously high incidence of skeletal variations is of-
ten noted in the presence of maternal toxicity or maternal
stress, as has been substantiated in this study for the high-
dose females displaying anemia and increased adrenal
weights, as well as increased 18-hydroxycorticosterone
and corticosterone serum levels.

Taking all this into consideration, the increased skele-
tal variations in this study and the subsequently increased
total incidence of variations were regarded to be of no tox-
icological relevance and were consequently not classified
as adverse events.

Unclassified findings. Unclassified findings are sum-
marized in Table 10 (for a list of all findings, see Ta-
ble S4). Unclassified findings consisted of blood coagu-
lum around placenta (control), discolored kidneys (three
fetuses of the low-dose group), and isolated cartilage find-
ings without influence on the respective bone structures
in all groups including the control. Unclassified carti-
lage findings were exclusively related to the sternum and
the ribs. They were significantly increased in all treated
groups but did not exhibit a specific pattern or a dose
response.


## Pre- and Postnatal Toxicity Study


### In Life Observations.

Parental generation. There were no test substance-related
mortalities in any of the female F0 parental animals
in the low- and mid-dose groups. One high-dose
female was found dead on gestation day 52 after showing
piloerection and vaginal discharge. Necropsy revealed

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2013, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.21058 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="238" -->
<!-- PageHeader="SCHNEIDER ET AL." -->


<table>
<caption>Table 6 Prenatal Toxicity Study: Summary of Reproduction Data</caption>
<tr>
<th>Dose EPX (mg/kg bw/day)</th>
<th></th>
<th>0 (Vehicle)</th>
<th>15</th>
<th>50</th>
<th>90</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Females mated</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>30</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pregnant</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>23</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Conception rate</td>
<td>%</td>
<td>90</td>
<td>87</td>
<td>83</td>
<td>77</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Aborted</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Premature births</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dams with viable fetuses</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>18</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dams with total litter loss</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Female mortalityF</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pregnant at terminal sacrifice</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>19</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>77</td>
<td>73</td>
<td>63</td>
<td>63</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Corpora luteaD</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>5.7 ± 1.47</td>
<td>5.6 ± 1.53</td>
<td>5.7 ± 1.33</td>
<td>5.8 ± 1.13</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Implantation sitesD</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>4.7 ± 1.72</td>
<td>4.4 ± 1.53</td>
<td>4.7 ± 1.06</td>
<td>4.8 ± 1.40</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Preimplantation loss (%)D</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>18.4 ± 20.33</td>
<td>21.4 ± 21.70</td>
<td>16.4 ± 17.94</td>
<td>16.9 ± 20.21</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Postimplantation loss (%)D</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>12.1 ± 17.52</td>
<td>8.8 ± 13.47</td>
<td>10.7 ± 17.83</td>
<td>14.2 ± 26.25</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Early resorptions (%)D</td>
<td></td>
<td>9.7 ± 16.69</td>
<td>8.8 ± 23.47</td>
<td>7.2 ± 17.08</td>
<td>13.2 ± 26.41</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Late resorptions (%)D</td>
<td></td>
<td>2.4 ± 6.31</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3.5 ± 6.98</td>
<td>1.1 ± 4.59</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dead fetuses</td>
<td></td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dams with viable fetuses</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>18</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Live fetusesD</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>4.2 ± 1.83</td>
<td>4.1 ± 1.28</td>
<td>4.2 ± 1.01</td>
<td>4.3 ± 1.56</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Live fetuses (%)D</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>87.9 ± 17.52</td>
<td>95.5 ± 11.96</td>
<td>89.3 ± 17.83</td>
<td>90.5 ± 16.55</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>MalesD</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>2.2 ± 1.44</td>
<td>2.1 ± 1.15</td>
<td>1.9 ± 1.18</td>
<td>2.1 ± 1.45</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Males (%)D</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>45.0 ± 27.22</td>
<td>50.9 ± 25.88</td>
<td>42.6 ± 24.64</td>
<td>45.4 ± 25.01</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FemalesD</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>2.0 ± 1.13</td>
<td>2.0 ± 1.10</td>
<td>2.2 ± 1.27</td>
<td>2.2 ± 1.34</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Females (%)D</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>42.9 ± 24.66</td>
<td>44.6 ± 25.63</td>
<td>46.7 ± 26.44</td>
<td>45.1 ± 27.70</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>% Males</td>
<td></td>
<td>52.1</td>
<td>51.7</td>
<td>46.8</td>
<td>49.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetal weightsP</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>80 ± 13.1</td>
<td>81 ± 10.9</td>
<td>74 ± 10.1</td>
<td>76 ± 7.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>N</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>18</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">MalesD</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>79 ± 16.3</td>
<td>78 ± 12.3</td>
<td>74 ± 12.6</td>
<td>79 ± 8.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>N</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>18</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FemalesD</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>80 ± 13.0</td>
<td>82 ± 12.7</td>
<td>72 ± 11.5</td>
<td>71 ± 9.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>N</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>16</td>
</tr>
</table>

*p ≤ 0.05; ** p ≤ 0.01 (F, one-sided Fisher test; D, two-sided Dunnett test).


<table>
<caption>Table 7</caption>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">Prenatal Toxicity Study: Mean Absolute and Relative Organ Weights</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Dose EPX (mg/kg bw/day)</th>
<th>0 (Vehicle)</th>
<th>15</th>
<th>50</th>
<th>90</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>N</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>26</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Terminal body weight (g)</td>
<td>864.7 ± 118.9</td>
<td>858.6 ± 62.0</td>
<td>876.3 ± 104.3</td>
<td>835.2 ± 88.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Adrenal weight (mg)</td>
<td>632.8 ± 132.3</td>
<td>606.1 ± 104.1</td>
<td>665.9 ± 151.7</td>
<td>698.0 ± 101.5*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Liver weight (g)</td>
<td>23.9 ± 3.5</td>
<td>24.8 ± 3.1</td>
<td>26.8 ± 4.8</td>
<td>25.0 ± 3.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ovary weight (mg)</td>
<td>266.6 ± 140.6</td>
<td>369.8 ± 156.4</td>
<td>263.0 ± 177.7</td>
<td>227.5 ± 141.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Adrenal weight (%)</td>
<td>0.075 ± 0.016</td>
<td>0.071 ± 0.012</td>
<td>0.076 ± 0.014</td>
<td>0.084 ± 0.014*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Liver weight (%)</td>
<td>2.827 ± 0.47</td>
<td>2.894 ± 0.3</td>
<td>3.048 ± 0.281*</td>
<td>2.991 ± 0.279*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ovary weight (%)</td>
<td>0.031 ± 0.017</td>
<td>0.031 ± 0.017</td>
<td>0.029 ± 0.017</td>
<td>0.027 ± 0.015</td>
</tr>
</table>

*p ≤ 0.05; ** p ≤ 0.01 (two-sided Kruskal-Wallis and Wilcoxon test). Means ± SD are shown.


that it died most likely while it aborted. Another high-
dose female was sacrificed moribund on gestation day
71 (during parturition) after showing hypothermia, pilo-
erection, and lateral position. No other compound-related
clinical signs were observed throughout the gestation and
lactation period. One control animal, one low-dose fe-
male, and one high-dose female were sacrificed prema-
turely after abortion on gestation days 46, 57, and 27,
respectively.

At 90 mg/kg body weight per day, the body weights
were approximately 6% below control values at the end of
gestation, although the difference was not statistically sig-

nificant. Body weight gain of the high-dose females was
decreased by approximately 15% during gestation. Body
weight gain was not affected by epoxiconazole at 15 and
50 mg/kg body weight per day. Body weight gain was not
influenced by the treatment during lactation in all groups
(Fig. S3).

Food consumption of the high-dose females was sta-
tistically significantly below control values (12-13%) dur-
ing the last week of gestation. Food consumption of the
low- and mid-dose females was comparable to the con-
trol animals during premating, gestation, and lactation
(Fig. S4).

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2013, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.21058 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="239" -->
<!-- PageHeader="EPOXICONAZOLE TOXICITY-SPECIES DIFFERENCES" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 8</caption>
<tr>
<th colspan="6">Fetal Morphology Data: Salient Malformations (for Complete Dataset See Table S2)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Dose EPX (mg/kg bw/day)</th>
<th></th>
<th>0 (Vehicle)</th>
<th>15</th>
<th>50</th>
<th>90</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Litters evaluated</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>18</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetuses evaluated</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>96</td>
<td>87</td>
<td>79</td>
<td>77</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Umbilical hernia</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetal incidence</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>1.1</td>
<td>2.5</td>
<td>5.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Litter incidenceF</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>4.3</td>
<td>4.8</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>17</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Affected fetuses per litterW</td>
<td>Mean% ± SD</td>
<td>0.9 ± 4.17</td>
<td>0.8 ± 3.64</td>
<td>2.4 ± 7.14</td>
<td>4.3 ± 10.71</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total fetal malformations</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetal incidence</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>7.3</td>
<td>9.2</td>
<td>6.3</td>
<td>12</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Litter incidenceF</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>33</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Affected fetuses per litterW</td>
<td>Mean% ± SD</td>
<td>7.1 ± 13.51</td>
<td>7.7 ± 11.95</td>
<td>6.5 ± 13.25</td>
<td>13.4 ± 23.95</td>
</tr>
</table>

*p ≤ 0.05; ** p ≤ 0.01 (F, one-sided Fisher's exact test; W, one-sided Wilcoxon).


<table>
<caption>Table 9</caption>
<tr>
<th colspan="6">Fetal Morphology Data: Salient Variations (for Complete Dataset See Table S3)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Dose EPX (mg/kg bw/day)</th>
<th></th>
<th>0 (Vehicle)</th>
<th>15</th>
<th>50</th>
<th>90</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Litters evaluated</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>18</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetuses evaluated</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>96</td>
<td>87</td>
<td>79</td>
<td>77</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Malpositioned carotid origin</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetal incidence</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>5.2</td>
<td>2.3</td>
<td>1.3</td>
<td>0.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Litter incidenceF</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>4.3</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Affected fetuses per litterW</td>
<td>Mean% ± SD</td>
<td>5.6 ± 12.44</td>
<td>1.9 ± 6.02</td>
<td>1.1 ± 4.59</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Thoracic centrum fused with arch</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetal incidence</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>25</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>7.3</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>32</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Litter incidenceF</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>12*</td>
<td>13</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>52</td>
<td>63</td>
<td>72</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Affected fetuses per litterW</td>
<td>Mean% ± SD</td>
<td>6.6 ± 13.04</td>
<td>21.7 ± 28.77*</td>
<td>26.3 ± 29.24"</td>
<td>38.8 ± 34.58</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Misshapen sternebra; unchanged cartilage</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetal incidence</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>12</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>5.2</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>7.6</td>
<td>16</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Litter incidenceF</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>9*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>50</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Affected fetuses per litterW</td>
<td>Mean% ± SD</td>
<td>6.6 ± 17.27</td>
<td>11.8 ± 20.51</td>
<td>7.1 ± 12.73</td>
<td>18.8 ± 26.20*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total fetal variations</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetal incidence</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>56</td>
<td>55</td>
<td>56</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>47</td>
<td>64</td>
<td>70</td>
<td>73</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Litter incidenceF</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>18</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>91</td>
<td>95</td>
<td>89</td>
<td>100</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Affected fetuses per litter W</td>
<td>Mean% ± SD</td>
<td>51.8 ± 31.16</td>
<td>68.1 ± 30.24*</td>
<td>67.2 ± 32.11*</td>
<td>75.5 ± 21.26</td>
</tr>
</table>

*p ≤ 0.05; ** p ≤ 0.01 (F, one-sided Fisher's exact test; W, one-sided Wilcoxon).


<table>
<caption>Table 10 Fetal Morphology Data: Unclassified Observations (for Complete Dataset See Table S4)</caption>
<tr>
<th>Dose EPX (mg/kg bw/day)</th>
<th></th>
<th>0 (Vehicle)</th>
<th>15</th>
<th>50</th>
<th>90</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Litters evaluated</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>18</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetuses evaluated</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>96</td>
<td>87</td>
<td>79</td>
<td>77</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Total fetal unclassified cartilaginous observations</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetal incidence</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>2.1</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>7.6</td>
<td>10</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Litter incidenceF</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>5*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>4.3</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>28</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Affected fetuses per litterW</td>
<td>Mean% ± SD</td>
<td>1.4 ± 6.95</td>
<td>12.9 ± 25.58*</td>
<td>7.6 ± 14.28*</td>
<td>17.0 ± 34.32*</td>
</tr>
</table>

*p ≤ 0.05; ** p ≤ 0.01 (F, one-sided Fisher's exact test; W, one-sided Wilcoxon).


<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2013, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.21058 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="240" -->
<!-- PageHeader="SCHNEIDER ET AL." -->


<table>
<caption>Table 11 Pre- and Postnatal Toxicity Study: Gestation and Delivery Parameters</caption>
<tr>
<th>Dose EPX (mg/kg bw/day)</th>
<th></th>
<th>0 (Vehicle)</th>
<th>15</th>
<th>50</th>
<th>90</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Females mated</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>27</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pregnant</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>27</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Without delivery</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Delivering</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>24</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>96.3</td>
<td>96.0</td>
<td>100.0</td>
<td>88.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>With live-born pups</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>24</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>100.0</td>
<td>100.0</td>
<td>100.0</td>
<td>100.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>With stillborn pups</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>3.8</td>
<td>8.3</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>12.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>With stillborn pups only</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>%</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Gestation index (%)</td>
<td>%</td>
<td>100.0</td>
<td>100.0</td>
<td>100.0</td>
<td>100.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">Gestation length (days)</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>69 ± 1</td>
<td>69 ± 1</td>
<td>69 ±1</td>
<td>69 ±1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>N</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>24</td>
</tr>
</table>

*p ≤ 0.05; ** p ≤ 0.01 (one-sided Dunnett test).


Mean duration of gestation was 69 days in all test
groups. All gestational parameters and indices were com-
parable between control and test substance treated groups
(Table 11). Thus, epoxiconazole did not adversely af-
fect gestation and delivery by the Fo generation parental
females.

Offspring. The number of delivered pups and aver-
age litter size was statistically comparable in all groups
(Table 12). However, the number of live-born pups and
subsequent numbers during lactation were slightly lower
at 90 mg/kg body weight per day, attributable to two
decedents and one abortion in this dose group. This ef-
fect was considered to be a result of systemic maternal
toxicity. The correlation to maternal toxicity was evident
since neither the average number of implants nor postim-
plantation loss, gestation, and live birth indices were sig-
nificantly influenced by the high dose of the test mate-
rial. Rates of live-born and stillborn pups were evenly dis-
tributed among the groups.

The test substance did not influence pre-weaning pup
survival in any of the treated groups. There were no
test substance-related clinical findings in any of the dose
groups. Likewise, the body weight development of pups
remained unaffected by administration of epoxiconazole
(see Table S5).

Postmortem examinations. There were no
compound-related effects on hematological and clin-
ical chemistry parameters (data not shown). Pro-
gesterone and 21-hydroxyprogesterone levels were
significantly higher at 90 mg/kg body weight per
day. 21-Hydroxyprogesterone concentrations were
also significantly higher at 50 mg/kg body weight
per day (Table 13). Androstenedione, aldosterone,
dihydrotestosterone, and testosterone concentrations
were below the limit of quantification in nearly all
samples.

The uterus weights were lower in all dose groups. How-
ever, in absence of a dose dependency and histopatholog-
ical changes these differences were considered not to be
compound related. Relative liver weights were increased
at 90 mg/kg body weight per day, and relative adrenal
weights were increased at 50 and 90 mg/kg body weight

per day. All other weight parameters were comparable to
controls (Table 14).

Macroscopically, yellow, white, or red foci were ob-
served in the liver of 1 of 25 animals at 15 mg/kg body
weight per day, 6 of 27 animals at 50 mg/kg body weight
per day, and 5 of 27 animals at 90 mg/kg body weight per
day, respectively. A few ovarian cysts ranging from 1 to
7 mm in diameter were evident in the control group com-
pared to those observed in the 90 mg/kg body weight per
day group, in which cysts were macroscopically visual-
ized in only 1 of 27 animals.

Microscopic examinations of the adrenal glands re-
vealed multifocal areas of cytoplasmic change in the
deep zona fasciculata increasing in incidence and sever-
ity from 50 mg/kg body weight per day to 90 mg/kg
body weight per day (Table 15). In these areas, the cells
of the zona fasciculata lost their large vacuoles and dis-
played a slight basophilic and foamy appearance. Other
cells contained small, needle-shape cytoplasmic crystals,
resembling cholesterol crystals. In addition, activated si-
nusoidal cells and minimal mononuclear infiltrating cells
were also observed. Vacuolation of the zona fasciculata
was increased in the 50 and 90 mg/kg body weight per
day groups.

In the liver (only livers with macroscopic findings were
examined), macroscopic foci correlated with acute focal
coagulation necrosis accompanied by minimal or no in-
flammatory response and occasional, minimal dystrophic
mineralization was observed. Since no signs of hepato-
toxicity were found in the clinical chemistry of these an-
imals, the acute necrosis was attributed to the isoflurane
anesthesia performed for the blood sampling before the
animals were sacrificed for necropsy. (Hursh et al., 1987;
Clarke et al., 1995; Durak et al., 1999; Percy and Barthold,
2001).

Ovarian cysts visualized macroscopically in control an-
imals correlated with cystic rete ovarii, a common finding
in guinea pigs (Keller et al., 1987; Shi et al., 2002). Unlike
follicular or luteal cysts, rete ovarii cystic structures lack
follicular or luteal cells and display single ciliated cells in
their epithelium that ranges from columnar to flattened
depending on the dilation grade.

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2013, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.21058 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="241" -->
<!-- PageHeader="EPOXICONAZOLE TOXICITY-SPECIES DIFFERENCES" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 12 Pre- and Postnatal Toxicity Study: Litter Parameters</caption>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Dose EPX (mg/kg bw/day)</th>
<th>0 (Vehicle)</th>
<th>15</th>
<th>50</th>
<th>90</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">Pups delivered</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>85</td>
<td>75</td>
<td>80</td>
<td>65</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>3.3 ±1</td>
<td>3.1 ±1</td>
<td>3.0 ±1</td>
<td>2.7 ± 1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">Pups live-born</td>
<td rowspan="2">N %</td>
<td rowspan="2">84 98.8</td>
<td rowspan="2">73 97.3</td>
<td rowspan="2">80 100.0</td>
<td>62</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>95.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">Pups stillborn</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>%</td>
<td>1.2</td>
<td>2.7</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>4.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pup weight at birth (g)</td>
<td>Mean ± SD</td>
<td>100.9 ± 9.6</td>
<td>101.7 ± 13.1</td>
<td>101.2 ± 10.4</td>
<td>96.3 ± 11.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Viability index</td>
<td>%</td>
<td>98.1</td>
<td>100.0</td>
<td>100.0</td>
<td>95.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Weaning index</td>
<td>%</td>
<td>100.0</td>
<td>100.0</td>
<td>98.5</td>
<td>99.2</td>
</tr>
</table>

*p ≤ 0.05; ** p ≤ 0.01 (two-sided Dunnett test).


<table>
<caption>Table 13 Pre- and Postnatal Toxicity Study: Serum Hormone Concentrations at End of Weaning</caption>
<tr>
<th>Dose EPX (mg/kg bw/day)</th>
<th>0 (Vehicle)</th>
<th>15</th>
<th>50</th>
<th>90</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Number of samples</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>24</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Progesterone (nmol/L)</td>
<td>4.56 ± 5.15</td>
<td>6.65 ± 6.24</td>
<td>7.17 ± 6.16</td>
<td>8.41 ± 5.39 **</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>21-Hydroxyprogesterone (nmol/L)</td>
<td>0.67 ± 0.58</td>
<td>0.71 ± 0.41</td>
<td>0.97 ± 0.62*</td>
<td>1.23 ± 0.61</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18-Hydroxycorticostereone (nmol/L)</td>
<td>1.67 ± 0.94</td>
<td>1.35 ± 0.46</td>
<td>1.50 ± 0.75</td>
<td>1.29 ± 0.54</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>11-Deoxycortisol (nmol/L)</td>
<td>1.63 ± 1.42</td>
<td>1.35 ± 1.58</td>
<td>1.25 ± 0.73</td>
<td>1.79 ± 1.68</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Corticosterone (nmol/L)</td>
<td>8.54 ± 8.81</td>
<td>6.23 ± 8.71</td>
<td>6.06 ± 4.14</td>
<td>7.77 ± 5.62</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cortisol (nmol/L)</td>
<td>1533 ± 826</td>
<td>1382 ± 590</td>
<td>1325 ± 513</td>
<td>1366 ± 792</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Estradiol (pmol/L)</td>
<td>1.13 ± 2.45</td>
<td>1.12 ± 2.71</td>
<td>0.88 ± 1.83</td>
<td>4.15 ± 15.85</td>
</tr>
</table>

*p ≤ 0.05; ** p ≤ 0.01 [Kruskal-Wallis test plus Wilcoxon test (estradiol) or Mann-Whitney U-test (other hormones)]. Means ± SD are
shown.


<table>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">Table 14 Pre- and Postnatal Toxicity Study: Organ Weights</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Dose EPX (mg/kg bw/day)</th>
<th>0 (Vehicle)</th>
<th>15</th>
<th>50</th>
<th>90</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N</th>
<th>26</th>
<th>24</th>
<th>27</th>
<th>24</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Terminal body weight (g)</td>
<td>735.5 ± 57.2</td>
<td>727.8 ± 59.8</td>
<td>715.4 ± 59.8</td>
<td>736.3 ± 72.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Adrenal weight (mg)</td>
<td>476.0 ± 91.0</td>
<td>504.6 ± 92.1</td>
<td>520.0 ± 78.3</td>
<td>509.4 ± 57.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Liver weight (g)</td>
<td>23.0 ± 3.9</td>
<td>22.4 ± 4.5a</td>
<td>23.3 ± 3.6</td>
<td>25.2 ± 3.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Uterus weight (g)</td>
<td>1.959 ± 0.602</td>
<td>1.651 ± 0.587*</td>
<td>1.727 ± 0.505</td>
<td>1.617 ± 0.659 **</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Adrenal weight (%)</td>
<td>0.065 ± 0.012</td>
<td>0.070 ± 0.011</td>
<td>0.073 ± 0.011 **</td>
<td>0.070 ± 0.009*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Liver weight (%)</td>
<td>3.120 ± 0.45</td>
<td>3.109 ± 0.416</td>
<td>3.251 ± 0.379</td>
<td>3.423 ± 0.385</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Uterus weight (%)</td>
<td>0.269 ± 0.089</td>
<td>0.229 ± 0.074ª</td>
<td>0.242 ± 0.068</td>
<td>0.218 ± 0.077*</td>
</tr>
</table>

*p ≤ 0.05; ** p ≤ 0.01 (two-sided Kruskal-Wallis H and Wilcoxon test). Means ± SD are shown.
aN =23.


One control animal, one low-dose female, and one high-
dose female were sacrificed prematurely after abortion
(on GD 46, 57, and 27, respectively). One high-dose Fo fe-
male died intercurrently on gestation day 52, most likely
while it aborted, as was obvious by the retention of a dead
fetus in its vagina. Another high-dose animal was sacri-
ficed on GD 71 in a moribund state, showing hypother-
mia, piloerection, and lateral position, because it seemed
to be unable to deliver. All of these animals showed sim-
ilar alterations in the uterus, cervix, and vagina. Namely,
the high-dose (90 mg/kg body weight per day) animal
that died on GD 52 showed necrosis, hemorrhage, and
severe inflammatory changes mainly affecting the uterus.
The other animal of this dose group that was sacrificed on
GD 71 showed similar, but less severe, changes predomi-
nantly in the cervix. In both animals, large congestive me-
sometrial vessels invaded by trophoblast cells were ob-

served in the uterus and in the oviducts. All other animals
with abortion showed similar characteristics, the uterus
being more severely affected (hemorrhage, necrosis, and
presence of trophoblast cells) than the vagina (edema,
congestion, or infiltrates).


## DISCUSSION

Epoxiconazole was well absorbed after oral administra-
tion, as shown by dose dependently increased Cmax and
AUCo-o values. Observed plasma 14℃ equivalents indi-
cated comparable exposures of guinea pigs when com-
pared to rats treated with comparable dose levels of epox-
iconazole (Fabian and Landsiedel, 2011). At the doses of 5
and 50 mg/kg body weight per day, AUCo-& values were
30.35 and 284.11 µg Eq/g.h in rats and 31.91 and 352.63 µg
Eq/g·h in guinea pigs, respectively. Therefore, the species

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="242" -->
<!-- PageHeader="SCHNEIDER ET AL." -->


<table>
<caption>Table 15 Pre- and Postnatal Toxicity Study: Incidences of Microscopic Changes in Adrenals</caption>
<tr>
<th>Dose EPX (mg/kg bw/day)</th>
<th>0 (Vehicle)</th>
<th>15</th>
<th>50</th>
<th>90</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Number of animals examined</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>27</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cytoplasmic change, (multi)focal</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>14</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Grade 1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Grade 2</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>11</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Vacuolation, cytoplasmatic, diffuse</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>27</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Grade 1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Grade 2</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Grade 3</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>11</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Grade 4</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>13</td>
</tr>
</table>


differences observed in the present studies cannot be ex-
plained by differing epoxiconazole absorption between
guinea pigs and rats.

Epoxiconazole was administered orally to pregnant
guinea pigs daily either from implantation to shortly
before the expected day of parturition, or from implanta-
tion throughout gestation and 3 weeks weaning, at doses
up to 90 mg/kg body weight per day. The only effect
at 90 mg/kg body weight per day was a slightly higher
number of decedents due to the abortion seen in the
pre- and postnatal study. No effect on body weight and
food consumption was seen in the prenatal toxicity study,
whereas a slight decrease of these parameters was evident
in the pre- and postnatal toxicity study.

Regarding clinical pathology, a mild anemia, indicated
by decreased erythrocyte counts, hemoglobin, and hema-
tocrit values, was present at 90 mg/kg body weight per
day in the prenatal toxicity study. More pronounced ane-
mia was observed in previous experiments with rats.
However, no effects on hematological and clinical chem-
istry parameters were observed at the end of weaning in
the pre- and postnatal toxicity study.

At the end of gestation, the higher androgen levels in
guinea pigs of all dose groups are probably a consequence
of aromatase inhibition. At this time, decreased estradiol
levels could hardly be detected because many of the indi-
vidual animal's estradiol levels were below the detection
limit of the assay. The higher 18-hydroxycorticosterone
and corticosterone levels at 90 mg/kg body weight
per day and increased 11-deoxycortisol levels in all
dose groups may be a result of alterations in steroid
hormone production of the adrenals. At the end of wean-
ing, higher progesterone and 21-hydroxyprogesterone
levels were present at 90 mg/kg body weight per day. 21-
Hydroxyprogesterone concentrations were also higher at
50 mg/kg body weight per day than in controls.

Liver weights were slightly increased at 90 mg/kg
body weight per day, possibly due to the adaptation
to increased metabolic load. Slight increases in adrenal
gland weights were observed in both studies at 50 and
90 mg/kg body weight per day. This weight increase
correlated with increased 18-hydroxycorticosterone and
corticosterone levels at the end of gestation and to vac-
uolization of the zona fasciculata observed at end of
weaning. These effects might reflect either an alteration in
the steroid hormone production of the adrenals or poten-
tial consequences of maternal stress at 50 and 90 mg/kg
body weight per day. It is noteworthy, that in contrast

to what was observed in rats, the histopathology of all
guinea pig placentas revealed no adverse effect caused by
epoxiconazole up to and including a dose of 90 mg/kg
body weight per day.

Evaluation of the cesarean section parameters re-
vealed no test substance-related, adverse effects on the
mean number of corpora lutea, implantation sites, pre-
and postimplantation loss, numbers of live fetuses, fe-
tal weights, and sex distribution. No dead fetuses were
noted. Likewise, pre- and postnatal administration of
epoxiconazole did not affect gestation or lactation of the
parental females up to and including a dose of 90 mg/kg
body weight per day. In particular, gestation length, par-
turition, lactation, and weaning as well as sexual organ
weights and gross and histopathological findings of these
organs were comparable between guinea pigs of all test
groups. There was no effect on pup viability or pup body
weights.

Examination of the fetuses revealed a slightly higher
rate of mainly skeletal variations in all dose groups. Such
slight retardations of the ossification process occur very
frequently in rat and rabbit fetuses and they seem also to
be common skeletal abnormalities in guinea pigs as pre-
viously experienced by Rocca and Wehner (2009). Taking
this and the potential consequences of maternal stress at
the high dose into consideration, the increased skeletal
variations in this study and the subsequently increased
total incidence of variations were regarded to be of no
toxicological relevance and are not classified as adverse
events, although the limited historical data available are
a significant obstacle to a thorough interpretation of these
findings in guinea pigs.

It is important to emphasize that test substance-related,
specific adverse effects on fetal morphology were not
observed in this study, at the tested dose levels up to
90 mg/kg body weight per day. Furthermore, the ob-
served minor abnormalities do not form a pattern, which
would be indicative of the well-known triazole-related
craniofacial malformations described for murid rodents,
such as cleft palate, hypognathia, hydrocephaly, exoph-
thalmus, macroglossia, and clusters of variations in the
skull bones (Menegola et al., 2006).


### Relevance of Findings for Humans

Epoxiconazole was tested in guinea pigs for prena-
tal and pre-postnatal toxicity up to a dose level of
90 mg/kg body weight per day. The high-dose level

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2013, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.21058 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="243" -->
<!-- PageHeader="EPOXICONAZOLE TOXICITY-SPECIES DIFFERENCES" -->

was based on the results of a range-finding study in
pregnant guinea pigs, in which the dose of 180 mg/kg
body weight caused mortality in 7 of 20 animals and
caused distinct signs of clinical toxicity in the remaining
animals, such as abortion, poor general state, as well as
markedly reduced food consumption and loss of body
weight (Schneider et al., 2011). In the present studies there
were no compound-related malformations, no increased
incidence of intrauterine deaths, and no adverse effects
on parturition, postnatal growth and development. Fur-
thermore, no compound-related effects were observed by
histological examination of placentas. Thus, the results in
guinea pigs are in profound contrast to those obtained
in epoxiconazole-treated rats, which showed dystocia, as
well as increased incidence of late postimplantation loss
associated with degeneration of placental labyrinth and
trophospongium at the dose level of 50 mg/kg body
weight per day. The fact that maternal serum estradiol
was markedly reduced, and that the adverse effects could
be prevented by co-administration of estradiol, clearly
demonstrates that sufficient levels of this hormone are
crucial for proper fetal development in this species. Due
to its general toxicity in guinea pigs, epoxiconazole could
not be tested at 180 mg/kg body weight per day, a dose
level that induced fetal malformations in rats.

Markedly decreased estradiol levels were observed in
rats after administration of epoxiconazole. Estradiol lev-
els were not influenced in guinea pigs. However, ob-
served increases of the estradiol precursors testosterone
and androstenedione suggest that guinea pigs are princi-
pally sensitive to aromatase inhibition by epoxiconazole.

Based on the results of the present studies it is evident
that guinea pigs react quite differently to epoxiconazole
treatment when compared to rats. Therefore, it is impor-
tant to assess the human relevance of the results obtained
in rats or guinea pigs. Based on the nature of the effects
observed, the focus is set on the comparison of pregnancy
and parturition in murid rodents, guinea pigs, and pri-
mates including humans.

Regarding pregnancy and parturition, guinea pigs
have a number of similarities to humans regarding
hormonal regulation (Batra et al., 1980; Hobkirk and
Glasier, 1993; Furukawa et al., 2011), placentation (Carter,
2007), trimester-equivalent gestation (Trewin and Hutz,
1998), extensive prenatal organ system development
(Nishimura and Shiota, 1977), including the brain growth
spurt (Dobbing and Sands, 1979) and parturition (Mitchell
and Taggart, 2009).

Placenta. The guinea pig placenta share similarities
with both humans and murid rodents. As in humans, the
guinea pig placenta is hemomonochorial (Enders, 1965;
Carter and Enders, 2004; Carter, 2007) and the trophoblast
invades extensively into the endometrium. Murid placen-
tas are hemotrichorial, and invasion of the trophoblast is
rather shallow. On the other hand, like murid rodents,
guinea pigs retain the yolk sac placenta until term. Guinea
pigs possess a subplacenta not present in humans or rats,
which does not contribute to maternal-fetal transfer.

Pregnancy. Guinea pigs deliver well-developed
(precocial) offspring after a relatively long gestation pe-
riod. Thus many events occurring during human fetal
development also occur during fetal life in guinea pigs.
In contrast, rodents have a short gestation period and

deliver rather immature (altricial) pups, where many
of these processes occur during postnatal development.
Therefore, guinea pigs are more similar to humans with
respect to relative pregnancy duration and intrauterine
development. As a species for prenatal toxicity testing,
guinea pigs are considered to be a predictable species re-
garding detection of teratogenic effects (Schardein et al.,
1985). Among other agents, guinea pigs are sensitive to
retinoid acid-induced malformations and are therefore
potentially susceptible to the proposed mechanism of
triazole-mediated teratogenicity (Menegola et al., 2006).

Hormonal regulation of pregnancy and partu-
rition. In rats and mice, corpora lutea, which are ac-
tive throughout gestation, are the source of progesterone.
Therefore, the presence and activity of corpora lutea is ab-
solutely necessary for the maintenance of gestation. Mat-
ing induces a prolactin surge in the pituitary, which is nec-
essary for sustained corpora lutea activity. Subsequently,
luteotrophic lactogens synthetized in the trophoblast bind
to prolactin receptors of corpora lutea and maintain pro-
gesterone secretion throughout gestation (Malassiné et al.,
2003). In contrast, the maintenance of gestation in guinea
pigs is only dependent on the activity of corpora lutea
during the first 4 weeks. Thereafter, progesterone is syn-
thesized by the placenta (Csapo et al., 1981). This is anal-
ogous to humans, in which the corpus luteum is ac-
tive only during the first trimester. Thereafter placental
progesterone production maintains pregnancy, even af-
ter ovarectomy. Thus, endocrine mechanisms maintaining
pregnancy are quite similar in humans and guinea pigs,
but fundamentally different from murid rodents.

Ovaries are the source of estrogen in nonpregnant and
pregnant rats. In contrast, pregnant guinea pigs and preg-
nant humans produce estrogens throughout the major
part of pregnancy mainly via the placenta (Batra et al.,
1980; Hobkirk and Glasier, 1993). This estrogen synthesis
in human placenta is dependent on the synthesis of an-
drogen precursors (dehydroepiandrostenedione) in ma-
ternal and fetal adrenals (feto-placental unit). The com-
plete synthesis of estrogen in human placenta is not pos-
sible due to absence of steroid 17a-hydroxylase (Strauss
et al., 1996; Fuchs and Fields, 1998; Furukawa et al., 2011).
In contrast, the rat placenta possesses 17a-hydroxylase,
but lacks aromatase.

In humans and guinea pigs neonates are born at a much
more advanced stage of maturity, as compared to rodents.
Parturition in humans and guinea pigs is considered to be
a multifactorial process, which is not as precisely regu-
lated as in rodents. This is evidenced by the occurrence of
"spontaneous" preterm births, which are common in hu-
mans and guinea pigs, but rare in rats and mice (Mitchell
and Taggart, 2009).

In rats, expression of oxytocin receptors is dependent
on an increase in estrogen and a strong decrease in proges-
terone secretion (progesterone withdrawal) during prepa-
ration for parturition. In contrast, a drop in progesterone
levels does not occur in guinea pigs and primates. Ris-
ing levels of estrogen are sufficient for the induction of
oxytocin receptors in these species (Fuchs and Fields,
1998). Preterm luteolysis is also not required in guinea
pigs, higher primates, and humans; this is in striking con-
trast to what is observed in murid rodents (Challis et al.,
1975; Thorburn and Challis, 1979). Steroid hormone levels

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2013, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.21058 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="244" -->
<!-- PageHeader="SCHNEIDER ET AL." -->

during pregnancy, as well as responses to antigestins, are
also similar in guinea pigs and humans (Challis et al.,
1971; Tulchinsky et al., 1972; Elger and Hasan, 1985). In
guinea pigs, prostaglandins are responsible for the initia-
tion of labor. PGE2 and PGF2x are synthesized in amnion,
yolk sac, placenta, and uterus in increasing amounts as
gestation progresses, in a manner similar to that seen in
humans (Moussard et al., 1986; Schellenberg and Kirkby,
1997). Intrauterine prostaglandins promote the parturi-
tion of guinea pigs by a mechanism that does not involve
luteolysis and systemic progesterone withdrawal, which
are essential actions of labor-promoting prostaglandins in
murid rodents (Welsh et al., 2005). Therefore, hormonal
control of gestation length and parturition is similar in hu-
mans and guinea pigs, but quite different from that of rats
and mice.

In summary, humans share many more similarities with
guinea pigs than rats in regards to pregnancy, gesta-
tional synthesis of estrogen and progesterone, intrauter-
ine fetal development, and parturition. The species dif-
ferences between murid rodents on the one hand, and
guinea pigs and humans on the other, are most evi-
dent during the second half of gestation and initiation
of parturition. This matches the time period in which
epoxiconazole-induced adverse effects, namely late re-
sorptions, prolonged gestation length, and dystocia oc-
curred in rats but not in guinea pigs, although the sub-
stance was administered at maternally toxic dose levels.
In light of these findings, as well as the remarkable species
differences between rats and humans, it is therefore very
unlikely that the results in rats have any predictive
value for human hazard assessment. The results of the
present study strengthen the evidence that the guinea pig
should be the model of first choice for human risk assess-
ment of chemicals affecting steroid hormone regulation of
pregnancy.


## CONCLUSION

In conclusion, prenatal or pre- and postnatal adminis-
tration of epoxiconazole at 50 or 90 mg/kg body weight
per day to pregnant guinea pigs caused signs of altered
adrenal steroid hormone production, indicating either
an alteration in the steroid hormone production of the
adrenals or potential consequences of maternal stress.

Mild anemia was observed at the end of gestation.
No adverse effects were noted regarding number of im-
plantation sites, pre- and postnatal loss, and number
of live and dead fetuses and on fetal sex distribution.
Specific adverse, compound-related effects on fetal mor-
phology, in particular well-known triazole-related cran-
iofacial malformations, were not observed. Furthermore,
there were no effects on gestation length, parturition,
and postnatal development up to and including the dose
level of 90 mg/kg body weight per day. In contrast to
rats, the histopathology of placentas from guinea pigs
treated with epoxiconazole did not reveal any adverse
effect.

Distinct species differences in pregnancy, placental
function, and parturition, which exist in rats on the one
hand and in guinea pigs and humans on the other, proba-
bly explain the difference in outcome of the prenatal and
pre-postnatal toxicity studies. These differences between

rats and guinea pigs are especially evident regarding the
hormonal regulation of pregnancy and birth, as well as
the site of estrogen and progesterone synthesis. Both hu-
mans and guinea pigs switch from luteal to placental pro-
gesterone supply in later pregnancy; estrogen is produced
mainly by the placenta and the fetus in these species.
Estrogen hormonal regulation was especially affected by
epoxiconazole treatment in pregnant rats, as shown by
markedly reduced serum estrogen levels at the end of
gestation. These decreased estradiol concentrations were
linked to the increased incidence of late resorptions in
rats, which were prevented by maternal estrogen supple-
mentation. In contrast, the serum estrogen concentrations
were not altered in guinea pigs. As a result, the incidence
of resorptions, gestation length, and parturition were not
affected by epoxiconazole administration in this species,
in which hormonal regulation during pregnancy is simi-
lar to humans, but differs from that of rats. It is therefore
very unlikely that the effects on pregnancy and parturi-
tion observed in rats can be extrapolated to humans. In
contrast, the pregnant guinea pig shares many similari-
ties to pregnant humans regarding hormonal regulation;
therefore, the guinea pig is considered to be a suitable ex-
perimental animal species to assess potential effects on
steroid hormone regulation during human pregnancy.


## CONFLICT OF INTEREST

Drs. Schneider, Hofmann, Stinchcombe, Rey Moreno,
Fegert, Strauss, Gröters, Fabian, Thiaener, and Fussell,
as well as Prof. Dr. van Ravenzwaay are all employ-
ees of BASF SE, which manufactures and distributes
epoxiconazole.


## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank the staff of BASF's
Reproductive Toxicology, Clinical Pathology, Pathology,
and Biokinetics Laboratories for their excellent technical
assistance. Furthermore, we wish to thank M. Dammann
for her help with the statistical analysis of the data.


## REFERENCES

Batra S, Sjöberg NO, Thorbert G. 1980. Sex steroids in plasma and re-
productive tissues of the female Guinea pig. Biol Reprod 22:430-
437.

Carter AM. 2007. Animal models of human placentation-a review.
Placenta 28(Suppl A):S41-S47.

Carter AM, Enders AC. 2004. Comparative aspects of trophoblast devel-
opment and placentation. Reprod Biol Endcrinol 2:46-60.

Chahoud I, Buschmann J, Clark R, Druga A, Falke H, Faqi A, Hansen, E,
Heinrich-Hirsch B, Hellwig J, Lingk W, Parkinson M, Paumgartten
F, Pfeil R, Platzek T, Scialli A, Seed J, Stahlmann R, Ulbrich B, Wu
X, Yasuda M, Younes M, Solecki R. 1999. Classification terms in de-
velopmental toxicology: need for harmonisation. Reprod Toxicol 13:
77-82.

Challis JRG, Heap RB, Illingworth DV. 1971. Concentrations of oestrogen
and progesterone in the plasma of non-pregnant, pregnant and lactat-
ing guinea-pigs. J Endocrinol 51:333-345.

Challis JRG, Davies IJ, Ryan KJ. 1975. The effects of dexamethasone and
indomethacin on the outcome of pregnancy in the rabbit. J Endocrinol
64:363-370.

Clarke JB, Thomas C,Chen M, Hastings KL, Gandolfi AJ. 1995. Halo-
genated anesthethics form liver adducts and antigens that cross-
react with halothane-induced antibodies. Int Arch Allergy Immunol
108(1):24-32.

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2013, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.21058 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="245" -->
<!-- PageHeader="EPOXICONAZOLE TOXICITY-SPECIES DIFFERENCES" -->

Csapo AI, Puri CP, Tarro S. 1981. Relationship between timing of
ovariectomy and maintenance of pregnancy in the guinea-pig.
Prostaglandins 22(1):131-140.

Dobbing J, Sands J. 1979. Comparative aspects of the brain growth spurt.
Early Hum Dev 3:79-83.

Dunnett CW. 1955. A multiple comparison procedure for compar-
ing several treatments with a control. J Am Stat Assoc 50:1096-
1121.

Dunnett CW. 1964. New tables for multiple comparisons with a control.
Biometrics 20:482-491.

Durak I, Öztürk HS, Dikmen B, Güren C, Çimen MYB, Büyükkoçak S,
Kaçmaz M, Avci A. 1999. Isoflurane impairs antioxidant defense sys-
tem in guinea pig kidneys. Can J Anesth 46(8):797-802.

Elger W, Hasan SG. 1985. Studies on the mechanism of action of antifertile
PG in animal models. Acta Physiol Hung 65:415-432.

Enders AC. 1965. A comparative study of the fine structure of the tro-
phoblast in several hemochorial placentas. Am J Anat 116:29-67.

Fabian E, Landsiedel R. 2011. 14C BAS 480 F (epoxiconazole)-kinetic
study in pregnant Wistar rats; Unpublished report; BASF, DocID
2011/1112619.

Fuchs AR, Fields MJ. 1998. Parturition, nonhuman mammals. In: Knobil
E, Neill JD, editors. Encyclopedia of reproduction. London: Academic
Press. Vol. 3, p 703-716.

Furukawa S, Hayashi S, Usuda K, Masayoshi A, Hagio S, Ogawa U.
2011. Toxicological pathology in the rat placenta. J Toxicol Pathol 24:
95-111.

Goetz AK, Ren H, Schmid JE, Blystone CR, Thillainadarajah I, Best DS,
Nichols HP, Strader LF, Wolf DC, Narotsky MG, Rockett JC, Dix DJ.
2007. Disruption of testosterone homeostasis as a mode of action for
the reproductive toxicity of triazole fungicides in the male rat. Toxicol
Sci 95(1):227-239.

Hettmansperger TP. 1984. Statistical inference based on ranks. New York:
Wiley.

Hobkirk R, Glasier MA. 1993. Generation of estradiol within the pregnant
guinea pig uterine compartment with special reference to the my-
ometrium. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 44:291-297.

Hursh D, Gelman S, Bradley EL. 1987. Hepatic oxygen supply during
halothane or isoflurane anesthesia in guinea pigs. Anesthesiology
67(5):701-706.

International Conference on Harmonisation. 2005. ICH harmonized
tripartite guideline - detection of toxicity to reproduction of medic-
inal products and toxicity to male fertility S5 (R2). Available at:
http://www.ich.org/fileadmin/public_web_site/guidelines/safety/
S5_R2/step4/S5_R2_Guideline.pdf Last accessed: March 25, 2013.

Keller LSF, Griffith JW, Lang CM. 1987. Reproductive failure asso-
ciated with cystic rete ovarii in guinea pigs. Vet Pathol 24:335-
339.

Kimmel, CA, Tramell C. 1981. A rapid procedure for routine double stain-
ing of cartilage and bone in fetal and adult animals. Stain Tech 56:271-
273.

Makris SL, Solomon HM, Clark R, Shiota K, Barbellion S, Buschmann J,
Ema M, Fujiwara M, Grote K, Hazelden KP, Hew KW, Horimoto M,
Ooshima Y, Parkinson M, and Wise LD. 2009. Terminology of devel-
opmental abnormalities in common laboratory mammals (version 2).
Birth Defects Res B 86:227-327.

Malassiné A, Frendo JL, Evain-Brion D. 2003. A comparison of placental
development and endocrine functions between the human and mouse
model. Hum Reprod Update 9(6):531-539.

Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Giavini E. 2006. Postulated
pathogenic pathway in triazole fungicide induced dysmorphogenic
effects. Reprod Toxicol 22:186-195.

Miller RG. 1981. Simultaneous statistical inference. New York: Springer-
Verlag.

Mitchell BF, Taggart MJ. 2009. Are animal models relevant to key as-
pects of human parturition? Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol
297:R525-R545.

Moore KL, Persaud TVN. 2008. The developing human: clinically oriented
embryology. Philadelphia: Saunders.

Moussard C, Alber D, Remy-Martin JP, Henry JC. 1986. Placental biosyn-
thesis and metabolism of prostanoids: special reference to guinea-
pig during the last third of gestation. Prostaglandins Leukot Med 21:
37-49.

Nijenhuis A, Wilf SW. 1978. Combinatorial algorithms. New York: Aca-
demic Press.

Nishimura H, Shiota K. 1977. Summary of comparative embryology and
teratology. In: Wilson C, Fraser FC, editors. Handbook of teratology.
New York: Plenum Press. p 119-154.

OECD. 1992. Decision of the council concerning the mutual acceptance
of data in the assessment of chemicals [C(81)30(Final)] (Adopted
by the Council at its 535th Meeting on May 12, 1981). In OECD
Series on Principles of Good Laboratory Practice and Compliance
Monitoring, No. 1, The OECD Principles of Good Laboratory Prac-
tice, Environment Monograph No. 45. Environment Directorate,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris,
France.

OECD Guidelines for Testing of Chemicals. 2001. 414-prenatal develop-
mental toxicity study, adopted January 2001.

OECD Guidelines for Testing of Chemicals. 2010. 417-toxicokinetics,
adopted July 2010.

Percy DH, Barthold SW. 2001. Pathology of laboratory rodents and rabbits.
2nd ed. Ames, IA: Iowa State Press.

Rey Moreno MC, Fussell KC, Groeters S, Schneider S, Strauss V, Stinch-
combe S, Fegert I, Veras M, Kaufmann P, van Ravenzwaay B. 2013.
Epoxiconazole-induced degeneration in rat placenta and the effects of
estradiol supplementation. Birth Defects Res (Part B) 98:208-221.

Rocca MS, Wehner NG. 2009. The guinea pig as an animal model for de-
velopmental and reproductive toxicology studies. Birth Defects Res B
86:92-97.

Schardein JL, Bernard A, Schwetz BA, Michael F, Kenel MF. 1985. Species
sensitivities and prediction of tetratogenic potential. Environ Health
Persp 61:55-67.

Schellenberg JC, Kirkby W. 1997. Production of prostaglandin F2 alpha
and E2 in explants of intrauterine tissues of guinea pigs during late
pregnancy and labor. Prostaglandins 54:625-638.

Schneider S, Strauss V, Rey-Moreno MC, Becker M, Van Ravenzwaay B.
2011. BAS 480 F (epoxiconazole) BAS 480 F (epoxiconazole) modified
maternal toxicity study in guinea pigs oral administration (gavage);
Unpublished report; BASF, DocID 2011/1229837.

Scientific Committee on Plants. 1999. Opinion of the Scientific Committee
on Plants regarding the possible inclusion of Fenarimol in annex 1
of Directive 91/414/EEC concerning the placing of plant protection
products on the market (SCP/FENARI/005-FINAL).

Shi FX, Petroff BK, Herath CB, Ozawa M, Watanabe G, Taya K. 2002. Serous
cysts are a bening component of the cyclic ovary in the guinea pig
with an incidence dependent upon inhibin bioactivity. J Vet Med Sci
64:129-135.

Siegel S. 1956. Non-parametric statistics for the behavioural sciences. New
York: McGraw-Hill.

Solecki R, Bürgin H, Buschmann J, Clark R, Duverger M, Fialkowski O,
Guittin P, Hazelden KP, Hellwig J, Hoffmann E, Hofmann T, Hübel
U, Khalil S, Lingk W, Mantovani A, Moxon M, Müller S, Parkin-
son M, Paul M, Paumgartten F, Pfeil R, Platzek T, Rauch-Ernst M,
Scheevelenbos A, Seed J, Talsness CE, Yasuda M, Younes M, Chahoud
I. 2001. Harmonization of rat fetal skeletal terminology and classifica-
tion. Report of the third workshop on the terminology in developmen-
tal toxicology-Berlin, 14-16 September 2000. Reprod Toxicol 15:713-
721.

Solecki R, Bergmann B, Bürgin H, Buschmann J, Clark R, Druga A, Van
Duijnhoven EAJ, Duverger M, Edwards J, Freudenberger H, Guit-
tin P, Hakaite P, Heinrich-Hirsch B, Hellwig J, Hofmann T, Hübel
U, Khalil S, Klaus A, Kudicke S, Lingk W, Meredit T, Moxon M,
Müller S, Paul M, Paumgartten F, Röhrdanz E, Pfeil R, Rauch-Ernst
M, Seed J, Spezia F, Vickers C, Woelffel B, Chahoud I. 2003. Harmo-
nization of rat fetal external and visceral terminology and classifica-
tion. Report of the fourth workshop on the terminology in develop-
mental toxicology-Berlin, 18-20 April 2002. Reprod Toxicol 17:625-
637.

Stinchcombe S, Schneider S, Fegert I, Fabian E, Richter M, Fussell KC,
Piggot G, van Ravenzwaay B. 2013. Effects of estrogen co-
administration on eposiconazole toxicity. Birth Defects Res (Part B)
98:247-259.

Strauss JF, Martinez F, Kiriakidou M. 1996. Placental steroid hormone
synthesis: unique features and unanswered questions, Biol Reprod
54:303-311.

Taxvig C, Hass U, Axelstad M, Dalgaard M, Boberg J, Andeasen HR,
Vinggaard AM. 2007. Endocrine-disrupting activities in vivo of the
fungicides tebuconazole and epoxiconazole. Toxicol Sci 100(2):464-
473.

Thiaener J, Kuhnke G, Glaessgen WE. 2011. Metabolism investigation
of 14C-BAS 480 F (epoxiconazole) in plasma of pregnant Wis-
tar rats after oral administration. Unpublished report; BASF, DocID
2010/10311712.

Thorburn GD, Challis JR. 1979. Endocrine control of parturition. Physiol
Rev 59:863-918.

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2013, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.21058 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="246" -->
<!-- PageHeader="SCHNEIDER ET AL." -->

Trewin AL, Hutz RJ. 1998. Guinea pig, female. In: Knobil E, Neill JD, ed-
itors. Encyclopedia of reproduction. London: Academic Press. Vol. 2,
583-597.

Tulchinsky D, Hobel CY, Yeager E, Marshall YR. 1972. Plasma estrone,
estradiol, estriol, progesterone, and 17-hydroxyprogesterone in hu-
man pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynecol 112:1095-1100.

US Environmental Protection Agency. 1998. Health effects test guide-
lines OPPTS 870,3700 prenatal developmental toxicity study, adopted
August 1998.

Wehner NG, Shopp G, Rocca MS, Clarke J. 2009. Effects of natalizumab,
an «4 integrin inhibitor, on the development of Hartley guinea pigs.
Birth Defects Res B 86:98-107.

Welsh T, Mitchell CM, Walters WA, Mesiano S, and Zakar T. 2005.
Prostaglandin H2 synthase-1 and -2 expression in guinea pig ges-
tational tissues during late pregnancy and parturition. J Physiol
569:903-912.

Wilson, JG. 1965. Embryological considerations in teratology. In: Wil-
son JG, Warkany J, editors. Teratology: principles and techniques.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. p 251-277.

Wise D, Beck S, Beltrame D, Beyer B, Chahoud I, Clark RL, Clark R, Druga
A, Feuston M, Guittin P, Henwood S, Kimmel C, Lindstrom P, Palmer
A, Petrere J, Solomon H, Yasuda M, York R. 1997. Terminology of de-
velopmental abnormalities in common laboratory mammals (version
1). Teratology 55:249-292.

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 98:230-246, 2013" -->
