<!-- PageHeader="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 80:12-17 (2007)" -->
<!-- PageHeader="@ 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc." -->


# Original Article Developmental Toxic Effects of Antifungal Flusilazole Administered by Gavage to Mice

Amina T. Farag* and Hala H. Ibrahim

Department of Pesticide Chemistry and Toxicology, Faculty of Agriculture, Alexandria University, Egypt

BACKGROUND: The developmental toxicity of flusilazole was studied in CD-1 mice after oral administration.
METHODS: Pregnant mice were given flusilazole at doses of 0 (corn oil), 10, 20, and 40 mg/kg/day, by gavage, on
gestational days (GD) 6-15. RESULTS: Maternal toxicity, as evidenced by reduction in body weight gain and signs of
toxicity, was observed at the middle- and high-dose groups. No significant incidence of resorptions or death was
observed in any of dose groups. There was a pronounced reduction in fetal weight, which was significantly lower than
control from 20 and 40 mg/kg/day. There was no significant increase in the incidence of fetuses with external or visceral
malformations in any of dose groups, but there was a significant increase in the incidence of skeletal malformations was
observed at 20 and 40 mg/kg/day. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study reported marked maternal toxicity, growth
retardation, and skeletal abnormalities in the mid- and high-dose groups. It seems likely that marked maternal toxicity
contributed to the observed alterations in fetal growth retardation and skeletal development. The no-observed-effect
level in the present study for maternal and developmental toxicity was 10 mg/kg/day. Birth Defects Res (Part B) 80:12-17,
2007.
C 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

Key words: developmental toxicity; flusilazole; mice; skeletal malforma-
tions; teratogenic effects


## INTRODUCTION

Triazole derivatives are antimycotic compounds used
widely in human and veterinary therapy and agriculture.
Interference with steroid biosynthesis and with forma-
tion of fungal cell walls has been identified as the
mechanism of these compounds (Vanden et al., 1984).
Because of their action, these compounds are used
successfully as systemic agriculture fungicides (against
mildews and rusts of cereal grains, fruits, vegetables, and
ornamentals) and against systemic and topical fungal
diseases in humans and domestic animals (Menegola
et al., 2001).

Flusilazole, a synthetic azole antifungal agent, is an
economically important agricultural chemical that is
used widely on crops such as wheat, barely, and orchard
fruits (Buchenauer, 1987). Although flusilazole has low
toxic effects (the reported acute oral LD50-value for the
female mice is 1000 mg/kg/day) (Wylie et al., 1985), it
has been reported as a teratogen in experimental animals
(Food and Agriculture Organization, 1989; Vergieva,
1990). Animal models in vitro and in vivo have been
used to investigate the teratogenicity of flusilazole.
Specific teratogenic effects on the branchial arch appa-
ratus has been described in culture whole rat embryos
(Menegola et al., 2001). Flusilazole has been tested for
in vivo teratogenic effects in rats and rabbits (Lamontia
et al., 1984; Solomon et al., 1984; Food and Agriculture
Organization, 1989; Vergieva, 1990; Hollingsworth, 1995).

When pregnant rats were treated with 250 mg/kg/day
during gestation days (GD) 7-16, an increased occur-
rence of fetal skeletal variation, including misaligned
sternebra, extra ossification centers in ribs, and ossifica-
tion delay in sternebra, were noted (Lamontia et al.,
1984). Cleft palate, absence of renal papilla, large renal
pelvis, and small renal papilla has been also reported in
the fetuses after exposure to 250 mg/kg/day during GD
7-16 (Lamontia et al., 1984). Doses ranging from 1/5 to
1/50 mg/kg/day of LD50-value equal to 1272 mg/kg/
day resulted in increased fetal abnormalities exophthal-
mus, hypognathia, microglossia, and cleft palate in
female rats treated on GD of 9, 10, 11, or 13 (Vergieva,
1990). Furthermore, oral doses of flusilazole given to
pregnant rats produced congenital defects such as
protruding eyes, twins of unequal size joined at the
jaw, and grossly enlarged tongues (Hollingsworth, 1995).
A common severe teratogenic intrinsic property for
flusilazole has been found, acting through alteration of
the normal hindbrain developmental pattern (Menegola
et al., 2005). No evidence of teratogenicity was found
after exposure of pregnant rabbits to 1.9, 4.8, and 10.1 mg

*Correspondence to: Amina Tolba Farag, PhD, Department of Pesticide
Chemistry and Toxicology, Faculty of Agriculture, (El-Shatby), University
of Alexandria, Egypt. E-mail: aminafarag2002@yahoo.com
Received 22 July 2006; Accepted 20 September 2006

Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)
DOI: 10.1002/bdrb.20098


<figure>

WILEY
InterScience®

DISCOVER SOMETHING GREAT

</figure>


<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="13" -->
<!-- PageHeader="DEVELOPMENTAL EFFECTS OF FLUSILAZOLE" -->

flusilazole/kg/day during Days 7-19 after insemination
(Solomon et al., 1984). Although flusilazole remains one
of the most widely used fungicides in the world, there
are limited current investigations of its teratogenic
capacity, especially at low dose levels in female mice.
In the present study, the possible developmental toxicity
of flusilazole was investigated at the dose levels lower
than those reported to produce developmental toxicity
in previous published studies (Food and Agriculture
Organization, 1989; Vergieva, 1990). These doses are
equal to 1/100, 1/50, and 1/25 of LD50-value (Wylie
et al., 1985).


## MATERIAL AND METHODS Chemical

Technical grade flusilazole (99% purity) was obtained
from Center Laboratory of Pesticides (El-Doky, Cairo,
Egypt).


### Animals and Conditions

Sixty male and 120 female ICR (CD-1) mice, approxi-
mately 10 weeks old, were obtained from Faculty of
Science, Department of Zoology, Alexandria University,
Alexandria, Egypt. All mice were examined for health
status and acclimated to the laboratory environment for 2
weeks before use. Temperature was maintained at
23±2℃, and relative humidity at approximately 50%,
with a 12 hr:12 hr light:dark photoperiod. Animals were
housed in stainless steel cages and given standard diet
and water ad lib throughout the study. Adult virgin
female mice were mated with adult males (one male/two
females). The day that a vaginal plug was found was
considered Day 0 of gestation. Bred females were
assigned randomly to treatment groups according to an
approximately equal mean body weight. Groups of 30
bred mice each were given flusilazole by oral gavage on
GD 6-15 at the dose levels of 0, 10, 20, and 40 mg/kg/d
flusilazole in corn oil as the vehicle. The administered
volume of each dose was 0.4 ml/kg body weight per day,
adjusted daily for recorded body weight changes during
the treatment period.


### Maternal Observations

Females were examined daily throughout the experi-
mental period and signs of toxicity were recorded.
Maternal body weight was recorded on GD 0, 6, 9, 15,
and 18. Feed consumption was recorded on GD 6, 9, 12,
15, and 17. Weights of maternal liver, kidneys, brain,
spleen, heart, and placenta were recorded at the time of
Cesarean section on GD 18.


### Fetal Observations

Mated pregnant females were anaesthetized using
diethyl ether on GD 18. The uterine horns were examined
for the number and location of fetuses and resorption
sites. Fetuses were removed, weighed, sexed, and
evaluated for external abnormalities. The uteri of
apparently non-pregnant mice were stained with 10%
sodium sulfide (Salewski, 1964) and examined for
evidence of implantation sites. Fifty percent of the
fetuses were fixed in Bouin's solution for razor blade
sectioning (Wilson and Warkany, 1965). The remaining

fetuses were fixed in alcohol, double stained with
alizarin red S for ossified bone and Alcian blue for
cartilage, and cleared in 2% KOH and glycerin (Peters,
1965; Hayes, 1994).


## Statistical Evaluation

Maternal toxicity was estimated from maternal body
weights, weight gain, feed consumption, and absolute
and relative organ weights. One-way analysis of variance
procedure (ANOVA) followed by Tukey's multiple
comparisons with the litter as the treatment unit was
used to compare malformation rates between the treated
groups. The maternal body weight on GD 6 was used as
a covariant (ANCOVA) for comparing weights of the
treated groups with those of the control. The proportions
of resorbed litters were compared using Z-test for
differences of proportions (Walpole and Meyers, 1978)
with a modified Bonferroni correction (Simes, 1986).
Fetal weights were analyzed using a nested ANOVA
followed by Tukey's multiple comparisons (Winer, 1971).
Percentages of resorbed fetuses were evaluated with
pairwise Mann-Whitney tests with a modified Bonferroni
correction to compare each treatment to the control
(Lehmann, 1975). Sex ratio and litter size data were
compared with the Kruskal-Wallis test (Lehmann, 1975;
Norusis, 1994). The statistical analysis were conducted
using a nominal x = 0.05.


## RESULTS Maternal Observations

Maternal clinical signs of toxicity. There were
no deaths or abortions during the course of the present
study. Signs of toxicity in the form of convulsions and
hyperactivity were noted in dams at 20 and 40 mg/kg/
day flusilazole compared with the control and other
treated groups. These signs appeared on GD 9 (Day 4
of treatment) in 60-80% of treated dams with the middle
and high dose groups, respectively. These signs pro-
gressed in the same animals throughout the second half
period of the treatment. No effects were noted in the
general appearance of animals in the control and 10 mg/
kg/day treated group.

Maternal body weight and weight gain. Ma-
ternal body weight gains are presented in Figure 1. There
were statistically significant reductions in the maternal
body weights at GD 9-18 for the 20 and 40 mg/kg/day
dose groups compared with the control. Maternal weight
gain was also reduced in the same dose groups among
the entire period of gestation compared with the control
group. There were no recorded changes in maternal
weight gains in the low dose group compared with the
control group. No appreciable changes in feed consump-
tion were noted among any of the dose groups compared
with the control group (data not presented).

Maternal organ weights. The absolute weights of
liver, kidneys, brain, spleen, heart, and placenta were
significantly decreased in the 20 and 40 mg/kg/day dose
groups compared with control and other treated groups.
No significant changes were noted in the relative organ
weights among any of the treated groups (data not
shown).

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 80:12-17, 2007 DOI 10.1002/bdrb" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2007, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.20098 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="14" -->
<!-- PageHeader="FARAG AND IBRAHIM" -->


### Fetal Observations

Developmental parameters and fetal weights are
summarized in Table 1. The number of the implants
per litter was not altered significantly in the flusilazole
treated groups. No significant changes in the number
of resorptions live and dead fetuses in any of the treated
groups compared with control group. Although no
significant difference was observed in the sex ratio of


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 1. Maternal weight gain (g) in mice after exposure to flusilazole on GD 6-15. Data are presented as mean+SD. *P≤0.05; P≤0.01.</figcaption>

25

Control

20

10 mg/kg/day

20 mg/kg/day

40 mg/kg/day

Maternal weight gains (g)

15

10

5

0

0-6

6-9.

9-15-

15-18-

0-18

-5

Days of Gestation

</figure>


the fetuses in any of the treated groups, fetal weights
for mice fetuses were significantly lower than those in
the control group for the 20 and 40 mg/kg/day treated
groups.

Table 2 depicts the number of malformations and
variations in the surviving fetuses from dams exposed to
flusilazole. No significant external or visceral malforma-
tions were observed in any of the treated groups
compared with the control group. Several external
malformations were observed scattered throughout
the dose levels. Exophthalmos (unilateral) and absence
of eyelids (bilateral) was observed in one fetus in the
20 mg/kg/day group and in two fetuses in the 40 mg/
kg/day dose groups. One case of cleft palate (soft-palate)
was observed in 40 mg/kg/day dose group compared
with a single case in the control. Regarding to the visceral
malformations, large renal pelvi was observed in one and
two cases in the middle and high treated groups
compared with a single case in the 10mg/kg/day and
control groups. Visceral variations such as subcutaneous
hemorrhage was observed in one, one, two, and three
fetuses in the control, 10, 20, and 40 mg/kg/day groups,
respectively. Bladder foci were only observed in one fetus
in the high dose group. Skeletal malformations and
variations were observed across the high and middle
dose groups compared with the 10mg/kg/day and
control groups. Skeletal evaluation showed large number
of malformations and variations, primarily involving the
axial skeleton. They included skeletal malformations:
absence of sacrum, fused, wavy, and absent of ribs,
shortening of long bones, absence of metatarsals and
metacarpals, and absence of phalanges; and variations:
poorly ossified interparietal, poorly ossified thoracic
centrum, cranial retardation, and retardation of pelvic
bones. However, these incidences of skeletal malforma-
tions and variations were increased in the 20 and
40 mg/kg/day dose groups.


<table>
<caption>Table 1 Developmental Toxicity in Mice Fetuses After Exposure to Flusilazole on GD 6-15</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th colspan="4">Flusilazole (mg/kg/day)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>0</th>
<th>10</th>
<th>20</th>
<th>40</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No. of females</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>30</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No. of pregnant (%)ª</td>
<td>28 (93)</td>
<td>27 (90)</td>
<td>26 (87)</td>
<td>25 (83)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No. of litters</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>25</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No. of implantation/litter</td>
<td>10.5±2</td>
<td>10.2±4</td>
<td>10.7±3</td>
<td>9.8±2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>% postimplantation lossb</td>
<td>2.0±7</td>
<td>2.0±5</td>
<td>3.0±5</td>
<td>4.0 ±8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Live fetuses/litter (%)c</td>
<td>10.3±0.3 (98)</td>
<td>10.0±0.2 (98)</td>
<td>10.4±0.4 (97)</td>
<td>9.4±0.9 (96)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dead fetuses/litter (%)"</td>
<td>0.1±4(1)</td>
<td>0.1±3(1)</td>
<td>0.1±4 (1)</td>
<td>0.1±4 (1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Early resorptions/litter (%)"</td>
<td>0.1±8 (1)</td>
<td>0.1±4 (1)</td>
<td>0.1±3 (1)</td>
<td>0.2±2 (2)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Late resorptions/litter (%)</td>
<td>0.0±0 (0)</td>
<td>0.0±0 (0)</td>
<td>0.1±2(1)</td>
<td>0.1±7(1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Litters with resorption (%)</td>
<td>2 (7)</td>
<td>2 (7)</td>
<td>2 (8)</td>
<td>3 (12)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Litters totally resorbed (%)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Sex ratio (M/F)/litter</td>
<td>1.1±2</td>
<td>1.1±2</td>
<td>1.1±2</td>
<td>1.2±1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetal body weight (g)/litter</td>
<td>3.33±0.15</td>
<td>3.05±0.11</td>
<td>1.98±0.15*</td>
<td>1.22±0.12*</td>
</tr>
</table>

Data are presented as±mean SD

aNumber of females detected as being pregnant by visual inspection of the uterus/total number of females with vaginal plugs x 100.
Sodium sulfide staining was carried out on all uteri without gross evidence of pregnancy but did not disclose resorption sites in any of
the evaluated dams.

b[(no. of implants - no. live fetuses)/no. of implants] × 100.

"Percent of implantations.

*Significantly different from control at P<0.01.


<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 80:12-17, 2007 DOI 10.1002/bdrb" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2007, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.20098 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="15" -->


## DEVELOPMENTAL EFFECTS OF FLUSILAZOLE


<table>
<caption>Table 2 Incidence of Fetal Malformations and Variations in Mice After Exposure to Flusilazole on GD 6-15</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th colspan="4">Flusilazole (mg/kg/day)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>0</th>
<th>10</th>
<th>20</th>
<th>40</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total no. of fetuses (litters) examinedª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>External</td>
<td>288 (28)</td>
<td>259 (27)</td>
<td>270 (26)</td>
<td>245 (25)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Visceral</td>
<td>140 (28)</td>
<td>125 (27)</td>
<td>135 (26)</td>
<td>117 (25)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Skeletal</td>
<td>148 (28)</td>
<td>134 (27)</td>
<td>135 (26)</td>
<td>128 (25)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>External malformationsb</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Exophthalmos (unilateral)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td>2 (1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Absence of eyelids (bilateral)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td>2 (1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cleft plate (soft plate)</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total no. of fetuses (%) with external malformations</td>
<td>1 (0.4)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>2 (1)</td>
<td>5 (2)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total no. of litters (%) with external malformations</td>
<td>1 (4)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>2 (8)</td>
<td>3 (12)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Mean % fetuses with external malformations/litter</td>
<td>1.19±3</td>
<td>0±0</td>
<td>2.5±5</td>
<td>2.6±4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Visceral malformationsb</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Large renal pelvic</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td>2 (1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Visceral variationsb</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Subcutaneous hemorrhage</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td>2 (1)</td>
<td>3 (2)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Bladder foci</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total no. of fetuses (%) with visceral malformations and variations</td>
<td>2 (1)</td>
<td>2 (2)</td>
<td>3 (2)</td>
<td>4 (3)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total no. of litters (%) with visceral malformations and variations</td>
<td>2 (7)</td>
<td>2 (7)</td>
<td>2 (8)</td>
<td>3 (12)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">Mean % fetuses with visceral malformations and variations/litter Skeletal malformationsb</td>
<td rowspan="2">1.32±5</td>
<td>1.0±3</td>
<td>1.54±6</td>
<td>2.12±8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Absence of sacrum</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>8 (6)</td>
<td>12 (7)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ribs/fused/wavy/absence</td>
<td>0/0/0</td>
<td>0/0/0</td>
<td>5 (3)/3 (2)/2 (2)</td>
<td>5 (5)/6 (5)/5 (5)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Shortening of long bones</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>7 (5)</td>
<td>10 (5)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Absence of metatarsals/metacarpals</td>
<td>2 (1)/2 (2)</td>
<td>2 (1)/2 (1)</td>
<td>8 (3)/5 (2)</td>
<td>9 (7)/10 (8)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Absence of phalanges</td>
<td>3 (2)</td>
<td>5 (4)</td>
<td>9 (3)</td>
<td>16 (12)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Skeletal variations</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>8 (6)</td>
<td>12 (7)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Poorly ossified interparietal</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>9 (5)</td>
<td>14 (6)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Poorly ossified thoracic centrum</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>6 (6)</td>
<td>11 (5)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cranial retardation</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>8 (5)</td>
<td>13 (6)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Retardation of pelvic bones</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3 (2)</td>
<td>9 (5)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total no. of fetuses (%) with skeletal malformations and variations</td>
<td>8 (5)</td>
<td>8 (6)</td>
<td>54 (40)*</td>
<td>76 (59)*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total no. of litters (%) with skeletal malformations and variations</td>
<td>3 (11)</td>
<td>5 (19)</td>
<td>20 (80)*</td>
<td>22 (88)*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Mean % fetuses with skeletal malformations and variations/litter</td>
<td>5.96±4</td>
<td>8.93±6</td>
<td>44.46±8*</td>
<td>55.04±11*</td>
</tr>
</table>

ªOnly live fetuses were examined.

"Fetus may be represented more than once in listing of malformations.

*Significantly different from control at P<0.01.


## DISCUSSION

To our knowledge, few published studies have been
reported about the effects of flusilazole on the develop-
mental toxicity during organogenesis period of preg-
nancy in experimental animals (Food and Agriculture
Organization, 1989; Vergieva, 1990). This is the first study
to evaluate the potential developmental toxicity of
flusilazole on the female mice during the organogenesis
period. In this study, the no-observed-adverse-effect-
level (NOAEL) obtained for developmental effects was
10 mg/kg/day. This dose was incapable of inducing
maternal or developmental toxicity compared with the
control and other treated groups. Doses of 20 and 40 mg/
kg/day, however, were maternally and developmentally
toxic, with significant appearance of maternal clinical
signs of toxicity and pronounced decreases in maternal
weight gains. These results are consistent with the data
indicated that flusilazole had systemic maternal toxicity
at dose levels up to 50 mg/kg/day (Lamontia et al., 1984;
Food and Agriculture Organization, 1989; Vergiena,
1990). Decreased maternal body weight in the absence

of changes in feed consumption may be related to
maternal systemic toxicity.

Although flusilazole was unaffected the number of
resorptions, live and dead fetuses, and sex ratio in any
of the treated groups, pronounced decreases in fetus
growth were observed in the mid- and high dose groups.
At 20 and 40 mg/kg/day, maternal body weight gains
were decreased significantly relative to the control group
at all intervals measured. Thus, decreased maternal body
weight gains were noted before the marked growth
phase in the fetuses, which occurs primarily during the
later stages of gestation. Therefore, the considerably
reduced fetal weights may have been caused at least in
part by maternal toxicity.

There was no significant difference in the incidence
of any external and visceral malformations in any of the
treated groups. Several abnormalities were observed
scattered throughout the dose levels. These results
contradicts the data reported that when administered
several triazole-derivatives to pregnant rats and rabbits
by gavage during the organogenesis period, they were
able to produce external and visceral defects (Machemer,

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 80:12-17, 2007 DOI 10.1002/bdrb" -->

15429741, 2007, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.20098 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="16" -->
<!-- PageHeader="FARAG AND IBRAHIM" -->

1976; Food and Agriculture Organization, 1981, 1983,
1989; Vergieva, 1990; Machera, 1995). The common
malformations for all these substances were cleft plate
and cranio-facial malformations. These external malfor-
mations were observed in the present study, but not in
significant manner as described by the previous studies.
Therefore, it could be expected that these patterns of
external and visceral malformations might be observed
in the present study by increasing the dose levels of
exposure. On the other hand, treatment with flusilazole
resulted in a greater number of skeletal malformations
and variations. These results are consistent with the data
indicated that flusilazole was able to produce severe
skeletal variants and abnormalities (Food and Agricul-
ture Organization, 1989; Viergieva, 1990).

Fetal growth retardation could be related to such
pronounced skeletal malformations or variations
(Aliverti et al., 1979; Ariyuki et al., 1980, 1982; Chahoud
and Paumgartten, 2005). Fetal skeletal effects could be
related to developmental delays, particularly in light of
the effects on maternal and fetal body weights. The skull,
vertebrae (arches and bodies), forelimb, hindlimbs, and
sternum are among the latest areas to undergo osteogen-
esis, and developmental delays are often seen in these
areas. Shortening of long bones may be related to
decreased fetal size.

In the present study, although flusilazole could
induce growth retardation and skeletal malformations
or variations in the mid- and high-dose levels, it
seems unlikely to be related to the fungicide
itself. Taking together in vivo and in vitro results,
flusilazole induced only slight signs of developmental
retardation when tested in vitro at very high concentra-
tion levels (5000 µM) (Menegola et al., 2001, 2005). In
addition, the results of this study reported marked
maternal toxicity, growth retardation, and skeletal ab-
normalities in the mid- and high-dose groups. It seems
likely that marked maternal toxicity contributed to the
observed alterations in fetal growth retardation and
skeletal development.

Pharmacokinetic parameters play a central role in
establishing the amount and the form of the fungicide
that reaches the embryonic compartment through dia-
placental transfer (Committee on Developmental Tox-
icology, 2000). It is known that animal species can differ
significantly in the rates at which they absorb, distribute,
and eliminate the pesticides and that these differences
represent a major obstacle in the extrapolation of
teratogenic data from laboratory animals to humans
(Brent, 2004). Flusilazole is lipophilic compound, which
results in its low free concentration in blood (Anderson
et al., 1986). It is probable that the fungicide is
transported to the target organs through partitioning
into blood lipids and binding to blood proteins (Ander-
son et al., 1986; Cheng, 1986; Trösken and Main, 2005).
It is one of a group of compounds known as sterol
biosynthesis inhibitors. Flusilazole acts against ergosterol
biosynthesis at the step lanosterol demethylase. It binds
to a haem preventing demethylation and can also be
known as a demethylation inhibitor. The result of
binding is an increase in sterol precursors, with a
consequent reduction in membrane integrity and altered
structure. Cell multiplication is slowed severely and the
altered cells are more susceptible to phagocytosis.
Flusilazole also partially blocks cholesterol biosynthesis

(Yoshida, 1988; Zarn et al., 2003; Waterman and Lepe-
shera, 2005; Trösken and Main, 2005). These effects may
be associated with maternal toxicity that may lead to
fetal growth retardation and skeletal malformations that
are found in the present study at middle and high
dose levels.


## CONCLUSIONS

The present data show that flusilazole can produce
teratogenic effects in mice at 20 and 40 mg/kg/day,
which were maternally toxic doses. No evidence of
maternal and developmental toxicity was observed at
10 mg/kg/day. The 20 mg/kg/day dose is about 20,000
times the acceptable daily intake for humans
(ADI = 0.001 mg/kg/day) (Trösken and Main, 2005).


## REFERENCES

Aliverti V, Bonanomi L, Giavini E, Leone VG, Mariani L. 1979. The extent
of fetal ossification as an index of delayed development in
teratogenic studies on the rat. Teratology 20:237-242.

Anderson JJ, Stadalius MA, Schlueter DD. 1986. Metabolism of 14C-DPX-
H6573 in rats. Wilmington, DE: DuPont de Nemours and Co., Inc.

Ariyuki F, Higaki K, Yasuda M. 1980. A study of fetal growth retardation
in teratological tests: an examination of the relationship between
body weight and ossification of coccygeal vertebrae in mouse and rat
fetuses. Teratology 22:43-49.

Ariyuki F, Ishihara H, Higaki K, Yasuda M. 1982. A study of fetal growth
retardation in teratological tests: An examination of the relationship
between body weight and ossification of the skeleton in rat fetuses.
Teratology 26:263-267.

Brent RL. 2004. Utilization of animal studies to determine the effects
and human risks of environmental toxicants (drugs, chemicals, and
physical agents). Pediatrics 113:984-995.

Buchenauer H. 1987. Mechanism of action of triazole fungicides and
related compounds. In: Lyr H, editor. New York: Wiley. p 205-231.

Chahoud L, Paumgartten FJR. 2005. Relationships between fetal body
weight of Wistar rats at term and the extent of skeletal ossification.
Braz J Med Biol Res 38:565-575.

Cheng T. 1986. Rat metabolism, study of [triazole-3-14C] DPX-H6573.
Wilmington, DE: Haskell Laboratory for Toxicology and Industrial
Medicine.

Committee on Developmental Toxicology. 2000. Board on environmental
studies and toxicology. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
p 58-84.

Food and Agriculture Organization. 1981. FAO plant and protection
papers. 42. Pesticide residues in food-Evaluations. p 521-523.

Food and Agriculture Organization. 1983. FAP plant and protection
papers. 61. Pesticide residues in food-Evaluations. p 447-450.

Food and Agriculture Organization. 1989. Plant and protection papers.

100/2 Pesticide residues in food -Evaluations. Part II: Toxicology.
p 117-139.

Hayes WJ. 1994. Pesticides studies in man. Baltimore: Williams and
Wilkins.

Hollingsworth J. 1995. Fungicide studies offer little comfort. A Medical
Mystery. Tampa, FL: Tampa Tribune Press. p 4.

Lamontia CL, Staples RE, Alvarez L. 1984. Embryo-fetal toxicity and
teratogenicity study of INH-6573-39 by gavage in the rat. Wilming-
ton, DE: Haskell Laboratory for Toxicology and Industrial Medicine.
Lehmann EL. 1975. Nonparametrics: statistical methods based on ranks.
San Francisco: Holden-Day.

Machemer L. 1976. Evaluation of embryotoxic and teratogenic effects on
rats following oral administration. Wuppertal-Elberfeld, Germany:
Bayer AG.

Machera K. 1995. Developmental toxicity of cyproconazole, an inhibitor
of fungal ergosterol biosynthesis, in the rat. Bull Environ Contam
Toxicol 54:363-369.

Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Giavini E. 2001. Antifungal triazoles
induce malformations in vitro. Reprod Toxicol 15:421-427.

Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Massa V, Giavini E. 2005. Study on
the common teratogenic pathway elicited by the fungicides triazole-
derivatives. Toxicol In Vitro 19:737-748.

Norusis M. 1994. Statistical package for social sciences, Version 6 SPSS.
New York: McGraw-Hill.

Peters PWJ. 1965. Double staining of fetal skeletons for cartilage and
bone. In: Wilson JG, Wurkany J, editors. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. 153p.

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 80:12-17, 2007 DOI 10.1002/bdrb" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2007, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.20098 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="17" -->
<!-- PageHeader="DEVELOPMENTAL EFFECTS OF FLUSILAZOLE" -->

Salewski E. 1964. Staining method for a macroscopic test for implantation
points in the uterus of the rat. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Exp
Pathol Pharmakol 247:367.

Simes RJ. 1986. An improved Bonferroni procedure for multiple tests of
significance. Biometrika 73:751-754.

Solomon HM, Alvarez L, Staples RE, Hamill JC. 1984. Developmental
toxicity study in rabbits given INH-6573 by gavage on days 7-19 of
gestation. Wilmington, DE: Haskell Laboratory for Toxicology and
Industrial Medicine.

Trösken ER, Main FA. 2005. Toxicological evaluation of azole fungicides
in agriculture and food chemistry. Dissertation zur Erlangung des
naturwissenschaftlichen Doktorgrades der Bayerischen Julius-Max-
imilians-Universität Würzburg.

Vanden Bossche H, Lauvers W, Willemsens G, Marichal P, Cools W. 1984.
The molecular basis for the antifungal activities of N-substituted
azole derivatives. In: Trinci A, Ryles J, editors. British Mycological
Society Press. p 321-341.

Vergieva T. 1990. Triazoles teratogenicity in rats. Teratology 42:27A-28A.

Walpole RE, Meyers RH. 1978. Probability and statistics for engineers and
scientists. New York: McMillan.

Waterman MR, Lepesheva GI. 2005. Sterol 14 alpha-demethylase, an
abundant and essential mixed-function oxidase. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 338:418-422.

Wilson JG, Warkany J. 1965. Teratology: principles and techniques.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Winer BJ. 1971. Statistical principles in experimental design. New York:
McGraw-Hill.

Wylie CN, Redgate D, Warheit DB, Chromey NC. 1985. Approximate
lethal dose (ALD) of INH-6573-66 in male and female mice.
Wilmington, DE: Haskell Laboratory for Toxicology and Industrial
Medicine.

Yoshida Y. 1988. Cytochrome P450 of fungi: primary target for azole
antifungal agents. Curr Top Med Mycol 2:388-418.

Zarn JA, Bruschweiler BJ, Schlatter JR. 2003. Azole fungicides affect
mammalian steroidogenesis by inhibiting sterol 14 alpha-demethy-
lase and aromatase. Environ Health Perspect 111:255-262.

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 80:12-17, 2007 DOI 10.1002/bdrb" -->
