<!-- PageHeader="Reproductive Toxicology 31 (2011) 194-199" -->


<figure>

ELSEVIER

</figure>


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Reproductive Toxicology

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/reprotox


<figure>

Reproductive
Toxicology

</figure>


# Stage-dependent abnormalities induced by the fungicide triadimefon in the mouse*

Francesca Di Renzo, Maria Luisa Broccia, Erminio Giavini, Elena Menegola*
Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Biologia, Milan, Italy

ARTICLE INFO

Article history:
Received 19 April 2010
Received in revised form 18 October 2010
Accepted 22 October 2010
Available online 3 November 2010

Key words:
Triadimefon
Teratogenesis
Stage-specificity
Cleft palate
Cardiac defects


## ABSTRACT

Aim of this work is the study of abnormalities induced by the triazole triadimefon (FON) administered
to pregnant mice at E8, E9, E10, E11 or E12. Pregnant CD-1 mouse were gavaged with FON 500 mg/kg
at the selected stages and sacrificed at term and fetuses morphologically examined and processed for
visceral and skeletal analysis. Administration of FON on E8, E10-E12 resulted in fetuses with cleft palate
(E8 39% and E12 24% representing the peak of sensitivity, in E8 fetuses associated to severe skull basis
abnormalities). Other cranial malformations (fusions abnormalities or agenesis of bones) were observed
in E8-E10 groups (E8 the most sensitive with 96% of malformed fetuses). Cardiovascular abnormalities
were observed in a stage dependent manner at E8-E10 (22.2, 3.8, 7.8%). As far as craniofacial malformation
is concerned, we propose that FON acts on two different stages, involved in early and late craniofacial
formation.

@ 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.


## 1. Introduction

Azoles are antifungals widely used as agrochemicals against
mildews and rusts of cereal grains, fruits, vegetables, or clinically
against topical or disseminated candidiasis and coccidioidal menin-
gitis (the clinical dosage usually suggested is 100-400 mg/day,
but larger doses are recommended for candidaemia, cryptococcal
or coccidioidal meningitis; the route of administration is dermal,
oral or intravenous injection). Azole derivatives act via the inhibi-
tion of CYP enzymes involved during the fungal wall biosynthesis
(CYP 51) [1,2]. Depending on their chemical properties, they are
used both in agriculture and in clinical therapy. Side effects of
azoles (mainly hepatotoxic effects) are mostly due to the inhi-
bition of mammalian CYPs [3] and have been related to affected
steroidogenesis [4]. All the tested azoles are teratogenic in exper-
imental animals: dose-related effects have been reported after
in vitro exposure of postimplantation rodent embryos [5-14] or
after exposure of pregnant rats and mice [15-19]. All the stud-
ied azoles induce the same malformation pattern: the reported
embryonic abnormalities were related to the branchial appara-
tus (abnormal or fused branchial arches) [5-14]. After external
and skeletal analysis of CD-1 mouse fetuses exposed in utero on
day 8 (E8) to 300 mg/kg per os of the agrochemical triadimefon

(FON) and examined at term of gestation, cleft palate has been
observed in 23% of samples, 87% showed cranio-facial defects
reconducible to alteration of skeletal derivatives originating from
the embryonic branchial apparatus (middle ear, squamosal, zygo-
matic, alisphenoid, styloid, pterygoid, mandible abnormalities and
fusion of skeletal elements) and axial defects (fusion, homeotic
respecification and duplication of segments). Interestingly, 77% of
examined treated fetuses showed ectopic cartilage at the level
of upper jaw [18]. Similar results were obtained by treating per
os pregnant rats on day 9.5 post coitum with 500 mg/kg FON
[19].

Tiboni and Giampietro [17] determined phase specific effects
of the clinically used Fluconazole by treating CD-1 mice with sin-
gle oral dose of 700 mg/kg on gestational day 8, 9, 10, 11, or 12.
Gestational day 10 was identified as the phase of maximal sensitiv-
ity as indicated by the postimplantation loss and for induction of
cleft palate. Middle ear abnormalities were detected after exposure
on gestational day 8, while limb defects were characteristic of the
group exposed on day 10 of gestation. In addition, the authors iden-
tified a dose-response relationship, investigated on gestational day
10, showing a clear dose-response in the induction of postimplan-
tation loss and cleft palate.

The aim of this study is to verify if a stage-specificity relation-
ship is detectable also after in utero FON exposure, and to expand
knowledge on FON-related effects. For this purpose, pregnant CD-1
mice at different gestational stages (E8, E9, E10, E11 or E12) have
been treated with a single oral administration of 500 mg/kg FON,
and fetuses examined at term of gestation for external, visceral and
skeletal morphology.

\# Grant sponsor: Ministry of University; grant number: 200605902.

\* Corresponding author at: Dipartimento di Biologia, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Via Celoria 26, Milan, Italy. Tel .: +39 0250314756; fax: +39 0250314802.
E-mail addresses: francesca.direnzo@unimi.it (F. Di Renzo),

marialuisa.broccia@unimi.it (M.L. Broccia), erminio.giavini@unimi.it (E. Giavini),
elena.menegola@unimi.it (E. Menegola).

<!-- PageFooter="0890-6238/$ - see front matter @ 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved." -->
<!-- PageFooter="doi:10.1016/j.reprotox.2010.10.011" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="195" -->
<!-- PageHeader="F. Di Renzo et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 31 (2011) 194-199" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 1 Maternal and fetal parameters.</caption>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>CON</th>
<th>FON 8</th>
<th>FON 9</th>
<th>FON 10</th>
<th>FON 11</th>
<th>FON 12</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pregnant dams</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>12</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>mbw change (0-18)</td>
<td>34.69 ± 4.87</td>
<td>27.78 ± 4.74</td>
<td>27.78 ± 9.65</td>
<td>31.0 ± 04.72</td>
<td>31.75 ± 8.03</td>
<td>28.33 ± 5.72</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Litter weight</td>
<td>24.08 ± 2.60</td>
<td>19.56 ± 7.13</td>
<td>18.67 ± 7.00</td>
<td>23.00 ± 2.87</td>
<td>23.50 ± 5.18</td>
<td>21.00 ± 5.73</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>mbw change without litter</td>
<td>10.62 ± 4.35</td>
<td>8.22 ± 5.19</td>
<td>9.11 ± 3.14</td>
<td>8.00 ± 2.60</td>
<td>8.25 ± 3.11</td>
<td>7.33 ± 2.66</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Implantations</td>
<td>13.62 ± 1.56</td>
<td>11.56 ± 4.03</td>
<td>11.56 ± 3.91</td>
<td>14.33 ± 1.50</td>
<td>14.13 ± 3.14</td>
<td>12.83 ± 3.43</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dead fetuses</td>
<td>0.08 ± 0.28</td>
<td>0.11 ± 0.33</td>
<td>0.22 ± 0.67</td>
<td>0.22 ± 0.44</td>
<td>0.13 ± 0.35</td>
<td>0.00 ± 0.00</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Resorptions</td>
<td>0.08 ± 0.28</td>
<td>1.33 ± 0.58</td>
<td>0.89 ± 1.17</td>
<td>0.75 ± 0.89</td>
<td>0.75 ± 0.71</td>
<td>1.50 ± 1.38</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Live fetuses</td>
<td>13.38 ± 1.80</td>
<td>11.00 ± 4.12</td>
<td>10.44 ± 3.84</td>
<td>13.56 ± 1.42</td>
<td>13.25 ± 3.15</td>
<td>11.33 ± 3.93</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Postimplantation loss (%)</td>
<td>1.19 ±2.92</td>
<td>4.95 ± 6.91</td>
<td>10.14 ± 10.88</td>
<td>5.89 ± 7.03</td>
<td>6.54 ± 4.80</td>
<td>12.81 ± 11.73ª</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetal weight</td>
<td>1.44 ± 0.11</td>
<td>1.43 ± 0.14</td>
<td>1.41 ± 0.09</td>
<td>1.33 ± 0.09</td>
<td>1.39 ± 0.07</td>
<td>1.47 ± 0.14</td>
</tr>
</table>

Data expressed as means and standard deviations of the litter means. mbw, maternal body weight.
a p <0.05 vs. control.


## 2. Materials and methods

Virgin CD-1 mice (Charles-River, Calco, Italy), housed in a thermostatically main-
tained room (T=22 ±2℃; relative humidity 55 ±5%; light cycle from 7:00 AM to
7:00 PM) with food (4RF21; Charles River Laboratories) and tap water ad libitum,
were caged overnight with males of proven fertility. The day of the vaginal plug
was considered as E0. 10 pregnant mice/group were orally treated by gavage with
500 mg/kg FON (Fluka, Milan, Italy; dissolved in a solution containing 10% acetone
in corn oil) on E8, E9, E10, E11 or E12 at 10:00 AM. The dosage was selected on the
basis of previous range-finding tests in order to obtain almost 100% of fetuses with
head abnormalities after dam treatment on E8. Controls were dosed with vehicle
alone on E8-E12. Females were checked for signs of toxicity after the treatment
until the sacrifice and weighted on E0, at the time of treatment and at term of
gestation.


### 2.1. Analysis at term

After dam sacrifice by CO2 asphyxia, the entire uterine content was weighed and
total implantation, live and dead fetuses, early and late resorptions were recorded.
The postimplantation loss index [((total implantation - live fetuses)/total implan-
tation) x 100] was calculated. Live fetuses were then explanted from the uterus,
morphologically examined, and weighed. The examined fetuses were processed for
visceral examination according to the free-hand razor blade sectioning method pro-
posed by Wilson [20] or for the double skeletal staining of bone and cartilage, carried
out according to the method described by Kimmel and Trammell [21], partially mod-
ified as previously described [22]. The osseous and cartilaginous tissues were stained
using respectively alizarin red and alcian blue reagents. After staining, fetuses were
analyzed under a dissecting microscope and the abnormalities were recorded.


### 2.2. Statistical analysis

Statistical analysis (Student's t-test) was performed on mean and standard devi-
ation of maternal body weight (mbw) change (E0-18), litter weight, mbw change

without litter (mbw change E0-18 - litter weight) and on mean and standard devi-
ation of postimplantation loss index and fetal weight (using litter as experimental
unit). The incidence of fetuses with defects was analyzed both by using fetus and lit-
ter as experimental unit. The percentage of fetuses and litters affected was analyzed
using the Chi-square test. The level of significance was set at p<0.05.


## 3. Results

No significant signs of maternal toxicity were detected in the
treated groups, as shown by clinical signs and by the weight gain
after treatment, even if a not significant trend of weight reduction
(without litter) was observable (Table 1). FON exposure induced a
general increase of postimplantation loss index, statistically signif-
icant on E12 (Table 1).

As far as the external examination is concerned, except for E9
group, FON exposure induced cleft palate in fetuses (Table 2). The
timing of exposure was critical to determine this malformation:
the peak sensitivity for this malformation was after treatment on
E8. Interestingly only 1.1% of fetuses exposed on E9 showed this
malformation, while the percentage progressively increased from
E10 to E12. At the visceral examination, a stage-related significant
increase of cardiovascular abnormalities was observed at E8-E10
(respectively 2.2 and 3.8% of great vessels abnormalities at E8 and
E9, 3.1 dextrocardia and 4.7 intraventricular septal defects at E10)
treatment dosage groups (Table 2).

After skeletal double staining, the morphological analysis of
cranial basis bones revealed a complete disruption of bone archi-
tecture only in the group treated with FON on E8: fusion of elements


<table>
<caption>Table 2 External and visceral examination of fetuses: % of affected fetuses/litters. Statistics was done only on bold parameters.</caption>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>CON</th>
<th>FON 8</th>
<th>FON 9</th>
<th>FON 10</th>
<th>FON 11</th>
<th>FON 12</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pregnant dams</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>12</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total externally examined fetuses</td>
<td>174</td>
<td>99</td>
<td>94</td>
<td>122</td>
<td>106</td>
<td>126</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cleft plate</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>39.4ªa /88.9ªa</td>
<td>1.1bb/0.08bb</td>
<td>16.4aa, bb,cc/33.3aa,bb,cc</td>
<td>15.1aa,bb,cc/75.0bb.cc,dd</td>
<td>23.8aa,b,cc/33.3aa,bb,cc,ee</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total viscerally examined fetuses</td>
<td>85</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>53</td>
<td>64</td>
<td>52</td>
<td>63</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total malformed at visceral examination (cardiac defects)</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>2.2/11.1ª</td>
<td>3.8/15.4ªa</td>
<td>7.8ª/44.4aa, bb,cc</td>
<td>0/0b.cc,dd</td>
<td>0/0b,cc,dd</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Great vessels abnormalities</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>2.2/11.1</td>
<td>3.8/15.4</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>0/0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Interventricular septal defects</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>4.7/11.1</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>0/0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dextrocardia</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>3.1/22.2</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>0/0</td>
</tr>
</table>

a p<0.05 vs. control.

aa p <0.01 vs. control.

b
p <0.05 vs. FON 8.

bb p<0.01 vs. FON 8.

C
p <0.05 vs. FON 9.

cc p <0.01 vs. FON 9.

d p <0.05 vs. FON 10.

dd p <0.01 vs. FON 10.

e p <0.05 vs. FON 11.

ee p <0.01 vs. FON 11.


<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="196" -->
<!-- PageHeader="F. Di Renzo et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 31 (2011) 194-199" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 3 Examination of fetal head after double staining: % of affected fetuses/litters. Statistics was done only for bold parameters.</caption>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>CON</th>
<th>FON 8</th>
<th>FON 9</th>
<th>FON 10</th>
<th>FON 11</th>
<th>FON 12</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pregnant dams</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>12</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">Total double staining examined fetuses</td>
<td>89</td>
<td>54</td>
<td>41</td>
<td>58</td>
<td>54</td>
<td>63</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Malformed fetuses (total)</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>96.3ªa/100ªa</td>
<td>41.5aa, bb /87.5ªa,b</td>
<td>10.3aa, bb/11.1aa,bb,cc</td>
<td>0bb,c,d/0bb,cc,d</td>
<td>0bb,c,d/0bb,cc,d</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fusions</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>74.1ªª/87.5ªa</td>
<td>36.6ªa, bb /62.5ªa,bb</td>
<td>Obb,cc/Obb.cc</td>
<td>Obb,cc/Obb.cc</td>
<td>0bb,cc/0bb,cc</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosus/tympanic ring</td>
<td></td>
<td>20.4/62.5</td>
<td>7.3/12.5</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosus/zygomatic</td>
<td></td>
<td>53.7/62.5</td>
<td>7.3/25.0</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Mandible/zygomatic</td>
<td></td>
<td>5.6/25.0</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosus/pterygoid</td>
<td></td>
<td>40.7/75.0</td>
<td>2.4/12.5</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosus/alysphenoid</td>
<td></td>
<td>20.4/37.5</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Alysphenoid/tympanic ring</td>
<td></td>
<td>5.6/37.5</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Basioccipital/basisphenoid</td>
<td></td>
<td>9.3/12.5</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pterygoid/tympanic ring</td>
<td></td>
<td>25.9/75.0</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosus/parietal</td>
<td></td>
<td>14.8/62.5</td>
<td>4.9/12.5</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Mandible/tympanic ring</td>
<td></td>
<td>7.4/25.0</td>
<td>9.8/25.0</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosus/mandible</td>
<td></td>
<td>14.8/50.0</td>
<td>14.6/25.0</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Abnormalities</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>66.7ªª/100aa</td>
<td>43.9ªa, b/75.0ªa,bb</td>
<td>10.3ªa, bb,cc/11.1aa,bb,cc</td>
<td>Obb,cc,d /Obb.cc,d</td>
<td>0bb,cc,d/0bb,cc,d</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tympanic ring</td>
<td></td>
<td>22.2/75.0</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosus</td>
<td></td>
<td>27.8/75.0</td>
<td>24.4/37.5</td>
<td>10.3/11.1</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Alysphenoids</td>
<td></td>
<td>22.2/50.0</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pterygoids</td>
<td></td>
<td>11.1/37.5</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Mandible</td>
<td></td>
<td>22.2/62.5</td>
<td>2.4/12.5</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Extra ossificated element</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>34.1aa, bb /50.0ªa,bb</td>
<td>0cc/0</td>
<td>0cc/0</td>
<td>0cc/0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ectopic cartilage</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>50.0ªª/62.5ªa</td>
<td>0bb/0</td>
<td>0bb/0</td>
<td>0bb/0</td>
<td>0bb/0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Agenesis Squamosal zygomatic process</td>
<td>0/0</td>
<td>5.6ª/25.0ªa</td>
<td>0b/0bb</td>
<td>10.3aa,cc/11.1aa,cc 10.3/11.1</td>
<td>0b,dd/0bb,dd</td>
<td>0b,dd/0bb,dd</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tympanic ring</td>
<td></td>
<td>5.6/25.0</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>

a p<0.05 vs. control.

aa p <0.01 vs. control.

b p <0.05 vs. FON 8.


bb
p<0.01 vs. FON 8.

c
p < 0.05 vs. FON 9.

p<0.01 vs. FON 9.
cc

d
1 p <0.05 vs. FON 10.

dd
p<0.01 vs. FON 10.

e p<0.05 vs. FON 11.

ee
p< 0.01 vs. FON 11.


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 1. View of cranial basis skeletal elements in a control fetus (a) or in fetuses exposed to FON at different gestational ages (E8, b; E10, c; E12, d). In the control sample (a) note: B, basioccipital bone; x and +, basisphenoid and alisphenoid bones;", pterygoid process; @, palatine; black * and white *, basal portion of squamosal and maxillary bones; O, otic capsule; t, tympanic ring. In E8 treated fetus (b) note the large cleft palate (&gt;), the abnormal position and shape of alisphenoid bones (+), in reference to the basisphenoid, the abnormal pterygoid process ("). Note also the upper jaw ectopic cartilage (&gt;) joining the basal cartilages and the abnormal Meckel's cartilage reaching the middle ear fused to the ear ossicles and the fusion between basishenoid and basioccipital bones (-&gt;). In later treated fetuses (c and d) note the unfused palatal shelves (#). Magnifications: 8x.</figcaption>

O

\*

\*

t

\+

O

a

X

B

b

\#

\#

\#

\#

C

d

</figure>


<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="F. Di Renzo et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 31 (2011) 194-199" -->
<!-- PageNumber="197" -->

and morphological abnormalities were associated with palatal
shelve malformations and cleft palate (Table 3 and Fig. 1b). On
the contrary, the totality of cleft palate observed after treatment
on E10, E11 or E12 was related to normally shaped but not fused
palatal shelves (Fig. 1c and d).

Other craniofacial specific and severe abnormalities were
observed after skeleton staining in 96.3% of the fetuses explanted
from mothers treated with FON on E8 (Table 3 and Fig. 2c and
d). The abnormalities were abnormal shape, reduction, agenesis,
and fusion of skeletal elements. Ectopic cartilage at the level of
upper jaw was observed, visible as ectopic cartilaginous fragments
or as a large element sometimes joining the upper and lower jaw

together (Fig. 2c and d). Jaw and temporal abnormalities were also
observed after treatment with FON on E9 or E10. A stage-dependent
decrease of effects was noted both as percentage of affected fetuses
and for the severity of malformations (fusion of elements coupled
with squamosal abnormalities in 41.5% of fetuses exposed on E9;
abnormal shape of squamosus in 10.3% of fetuses exposed on E10)
(Table 3 and Fig. 2e-h).


## 4. Discussion

In the present work, we demonstrate a stage-specific trend
in the occurrence of craniofacial malformations after single


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 2. Lateral appearance of the normal skull at term of gestation (a and b). (a) Maxillary structures: +, premaxillary;", maxillary; &gt;, zygomatic; black *, squamosal bones. No cartilaginous elements are visible in this region. At the mandible level, the dental bone (#) is recognizable. The tympanic ring (t) is clearly visible near the otic capsule (O). (b) Magnification of (a). Note the normal structure of the squamosal bone (black *) with the retro tympanic (s) and zygomatic (white *) processes.º, zygomatic process of the maxillary bone; #, dental bone; &gt;, zygomatic bone. (c and d) Lateral view of a E8 FON fetus. Note the fusion of the upper jaw bones (s), the ectopic cartilage ("), the abnormal mandible (#) and abnormal squamosus (@). (e and f) Lateral view of a E9 FON fetus. Note the squamosal abnormalities (@) and the fusion between squamosus and mandible (x). (g and h) Lateral view of a E10 FON fetus. Note the squamosal abnormalities (&gt;). Magnifications: a, c, e and g: 8x; b, d, f and h: 20x.</figcaption>

**

O

O

\*

\#

\#

a

b

O

@

o

a

C

d

a

X

@

X

e

f

h

</figure>


<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="198" -->
<!-- PageHeader="F. Di Renzo et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 31 (2011) 194-199" -->

dosage of FON on E8, E9, E10, E11 or E12. The reported cran-
iofacial abnormalities were cleft palate and disruption of skull
elements.

The complex malformative pattern (including cleft palate)
described in the present work after exposure to FON early in preg-
nancy (E8) could be explained as the result of the perturbation of
migrating neural crest cells.

As demonstrated by Jiang et al. [23], neural crest contribution
is fundamental for the mammalian skull morphogenesis. In par-
ticular, in mammals, the nasal, frontal, inter-parietal, alysphenoid
bones and ear ossicles are totally originated from neural crest con-
tribution, while hyoid and temporal bones have a double origin
from mesoderm and neural crest population. As far as the tem-
poral bone is concerned, the squamosal region is a neural crest
derivative. The observation of the skull embryogenesis allowed to
show a spatio- and temporal-specification of elements involved in
the morphogenesis of the different skull elements: the first neural
crest cells colonizing the first branchial arch are instructed by the
branchial mesoderm to differentiate into the mandibular process,
the later migrating elements, by contrast, are progressively induced
to differentiate the maxillary process and the squamosal region
[24]. In mammals the neural crest derivatives of the mandibular
and maxillary processes originate the jaw elements, the malleus,
the Meckel's cartilage and the incus [25].

In the present work, a good correlation between stage of migrat-
ing neural crest cells at the time of treatment and abnormal skeletal
elements at term is possible: the most serious alterations can be
identified in the groups where no crest cells already have been
instructed to have a determined fate (E8), while no effects are
visible after migration and specification of crest cells occurred
(E11-E12).

As far as the secondary palate is concerned, a double peak was
observed at E8 and E12. The skeletal analysis, however, revealed
that this external malformation was associated to a complete dis-
ruption of bone architecture only in the group treated with FON
on E8, while it resulted as the consequence of unfused normally
shaped palatal shelves in E10-E12 group.

As described by McBratney-Owen et al. [26] the cranial base
of the mouse develops in a stage-dependent manner from E8 till
E16, when the formation of the condrocranium is complete. Neural
crest cells destined for the anterior cranial base migrate at E8, while
mesoderm derived tissues originate the posterior part of the cranial
base, chondrifying at later stages [23].

Around at E11.5, in mice, secondary palate primordia appear
organized on the medial wall of the maxillary processes, then sec-
ondary palate development involve the growth, elevation, medial
elongation and midline fusion of already formed palatal shelves
[27].

The cleft palate described in the present work after treatment
with FON of pregnant mice during the early developmental stage
(E8) could be due to a perturbation of the palate primordia mor-
phopgenesis, while the same external malformation reported after
dosage at later developmental stages (E10-E12) could be solely the
result of the failure of closure of bilateral palatal shelves in the
midline.

Cleft defects as well as craniofacial and limb defects have been
described in experimental animals after the in utero or in vitro
exposure to a number of azole fungicides, and for some of them
dose-dependency and stage-specificity have been described, even
if the specific mechanism of action has never been demonstrated
[28,29]. Previously reported experimental data [8-14] strongly
suggest that the inhibition of mammalian CYP enzymes could be
the mechanism accounting for the teratogenic effects of these
molecules. In particular, the inhibition of CYP26 (the enzyme
involved in the catabolismof retinoic acid) has been suggested as
the mechanism related to neural crest cell migration alterations

[8-14]. To explain the multiple effects on FON during early and
later stages of palatogenesis, however, the inhibition of several
CYP enzymes involved in palatogenesis (including those involved
in cholesterol synthesis) has to be taken in account.

Finally, cardiovascular defects have been reported after the
visceral examination in at stage-related manner at E8-E10. Such
effects are a novelty for the azole literature on experimental models
and were not reported by Tiboni and Giampietro [17] in their work
on stage-specific effects of a single exposure to Fluconazole. The
cardiovascular effects obtained in the present work could be related
to a disruption of cardiac neural crest cell migration involved in
the outflow septation. To confirm these data and this hypothesis,
further investigations are necessary.

To explain the different peaks of sensitivity and effects observed
in our present work if compared to the previously published data
on Fluconazole [17], considering the fact that different azole-
derivatives show different inhibitory properties on a variety of CYP
isoforms, the possibility that different azoles can selectively inhibit
specific members of CYP family has to be considered. A differ-
ent pharmacokinetic pathway of FON and Fluconazole could also
alternatively be suggested to explain the not completely concor-
dant data between FON and Fluconazole works. These speculative
hypotheses, however, need further ad hoc experiments.


## Acknowledgment

The authors appreciated the skilful technical assistance of Mr.
Calogero Bella.


## References

[1] Vanden Bossche H. Biochemical targets for antifungal azole derivatives:
hypothesis on the mode of action. Curr Top Med Mycol 1985;1:313-51.

[2] Como JA, Dismukes WE. Oral azole drugs as systemic antifungal therapy. N Engl
J Med 1994;330:263-72.

[3] Song JC, Deresinski S. Hepatotoxicity of antifungal agents. Curr Opin Investig
Drugs 2005;6:170-7.

[4] Zarn JA, Bruschweiler BJ, Schlatter JR. Azole fungicides affect mammalian
steroidogenesis by inhibiting sterol 14 alpha-demethylase and aromatase. Env-
iron Health Perspect 2003;111:255-61.

[5] Tiboni GM. Second branchial arch anomalies induced by fluconazole, a bis-
triazole antifungal agent, in cultured mouse embryos. Res Commun Chem
Pathol Pharmacol 1993;79:381-4.

[6] Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Prati M, Giavini E. In vitro teratogenic
potential of two antifungal triazoles: triadimefon and triadimenol. In Vitro Cell
Dev Biol Anim 2000;36:88-95.

[7] Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Giavini E. Antifungal triazoles induce mal-
formations in vitro. Reprod Toxicol 2001;15:421-7.

[8] Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Giavini E. Pathogenic pathways
in fluconazole-induced branchial arch malformations. Birth Defects Res A
2003;67:116-24.

[9] Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Massa V, Giavini E. Relationship between
hindbrain segmentation, neural crest cell migration and branchial arch abnor-
malities in rat embryos exposed to fluconazole and retinoic acid in vitro. Reprod
Toxicol 2004; 18:121-30.

[10] Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Massa V, Giavini E. Study on the common
teratogenic pathway elicited by the fungicides triazole-derivatives. Toxicol In
Vitro 2005; 19:737-48.

[11] Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Giavini E. Postulated pathogenic path-
way in triazole fungicide induced dysmorphogenic effects. Reprod Toxicol
2006;22:186-95.

[12] Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Giavini E. Dysmorphogenic effects of some
fungicides derived from the imidazole on rat embryos cultured in vitro. Reprod
Toxicol 2006;21:74-82.

[13] Di Renzo F, Broccia ML, Giavini E, Menegola E. Citral, an inhibitor of retinoic acid
synthesis, attenuates the frequency and severity of branchial arch abnormali-
ties induced by triazole-derivative fluconazole in rat embryos cultured in vitro.
Reprod Toxicol 2007;24:326-32.

[14] Di Renzo F, Corsini E, Broccia ML, Marinovich M, Galli CL, Giavini E, et al. Molec-
ular mechanism of teratogenic effects induced by the fungicide triadimefon:
study of the expression of TGF-beta mRNA and TGF-beta and CRABPI proteins
during rat in vitro development. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2009;234:107-16.

[15] Tiboni GM, Iammarrone E, Giampietro F, Lamonaca D, Bellati U, Di Ilio C. Tera-
tological interaction between the bis-triazole antifungal agent fluconazole and
the anticonvulsant drug phenytoin. Teratology 1999;59:81-7.

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="199" -->
<!-- PageHeader="F. Di Renzo et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 31 (2011) 194-199" -->

[16] Tiboni GM, Giampietro F, Angelucci S, Moio P, Bellati U, Di Ilio C. Additional
investigation on the potentiation of phenytoin teratogenicity by fluconazole.
Toxicol Lett 2003;145:219-29.

[17] Tiboni GM, Giampietro F. Murine teratology of fluconazole: evaluation of
developmental phase specificity and dose dependence. Pediatr Res 2005;58:
94-9.

[18] Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Massa V, Giavini E. Craniofacial and axial
skeletal defects induced by the fungicide triadimefon in the mouse. Birth
Defects Res B 2005;74:185-95.

[19] Di Renzo F, Broccia ML, Giavini E, Menegola E. Antifungal triazole derivative
triadimefon induces ectopic maxillary cartilage by altering the morphogenesis
of the first branchial arch. Birth Defects Res B 2007;80:2-11.

[20] Wilson JC. Methods for administering agents and detecting malformations in
experimental animals. In: Wilson JG, Warkany J, editors. Teratology: principles
and techniques. Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 1965. p. 262-77.

[21] Kimmel CA, Trammel C. A rapid procedure for routine double staining of carti-
lage and bone in fetal and adult animals. Stain Technol 1981;56:271-3.

[22] Menegola E, Broccia ML, Giavini E. Atlas of rat fetal skeleton double stained for
bone and cartilage. Teratology 2001;64:125-33.

[23] Jiang X, Iseki S, Maxson RE, Sucov HM, Morriss-Kay GM. Tissue ori-
gins and interactions in the mammalian skull vault. Dev Biol 2002;241:
106-16.

[24] Trainor PA, Krumlauf R. Patterning the cranial neural crest: hindbrain segmen-
tation and Hox gene plasticity. Nat Rev Neurosci 2000; 1:116-24.

[25] Noden DM, Schneider RA. Neural crest cells and the community of plan for
craniofacial development: historical debates and current perspectives. Adv Exp
Med Biol 2006;589:1-23.

[26] McBratney-Owen B, Iseki S, Bamforth SD, Olsen BR, Morriss-Kay GM.
Development and tissue origins of the mammalian cranial base. Dev Biol
2008;322:121-32.

[27] Okano J, Suzuki S, Shiota K. Regional heterogeneity in the developing palate:
morphological and molecular evidence for normal and abnormal palatogenesis.
Congenit Anom (Kyoto) 2006;46:49-54.

[28] Marotta F, Tiboni GM. Molecular aspects of azoles-induced teratogenesis.
Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2010;6:461-82.

[29] Giavini E, Menegola E. Are azole fungicides a teratogenic risk for human con-
ceptus? Toxicol Lett 2010;198:106-11.
