<!-- PageHeader="Chemosphere 264 (2021) 128432" -->


<figure>

ELSEVIER

</figure>


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Chemosphere

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/chemosphere

---

Chemosphere


<figure>
</figure>


# Tebuconazole exposure disrupts placental function and causes fetal low birth weight in rats


<figure>

Check for
updates

</figure>


Yingfen Ying ª, Peipei Pan ª, Cheng Zou a, Yiyan Wang ª, Yunbing Tang ª, Xiaohong Hou ª,
Yang Li ª, Qiang Xu b, Liben Lin b, Jieqiang Lu ª, Ren-shan Ge ª, *

a Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying Children's Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang,
325000, PR China

b Department of Pathology, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying Children's Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, 325000, PR
China


## HIGHLIGHTS

· Tebuconazole damages the structure
and function of the placenta.

· Tebuconazole causes pathological
changes of the placenta.

· Tebuconazole down-regulated Tfrc
and Eif2ak2 expression.

· Tebuconazole up-regulated the
expression of Cd34, Cd36, Jag1,
Cyp1a1, Esrra.

· Tebuconazole lowers placental estra-
diol level.


## ARTICLE INFO

Article history:
Received 24 June 2020
Received in revised form
17 September 2020

Accepted 22 September 2020

Available online 5 October 2020

Handling Editor: Jian-Ying Hu

Keywords:
Tebuconazole
Low birth weight
Placental dysfunction

Trophoblast
Fertilization
Estradiol


## GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT


<figure>

TEB (p.o. 25, 50, 100mg/kg)

JAGI

TFRC

AQPI

CD34

CD36

CYPIAI

SRR

EIFZAKZ

Placenta
Hypertrophy

Fetus

-Hydroxyeur

LAM

Calcification
Infarction

PLEW

</figure>


## ABSTRACT

Tebuconazole (TEB) is one of the widely used broad-spectrum triazole fungicides. Its accumulation in
mammals leads to various endocrine disruptions. However, it is unclear whether the exposure of TEB
during pregnancy affects the growth and development of fetus and placenta. Here, TEB was exposed to
pregnant Sprague-Dawley female rats from gestational days 12-21 of 0, 25, 50 or 100 mg/kg for 10 days.
TEB reduced placental estradiol levels. TEB disrupted the structure and function of the placenta, leading
to hypertrophy, fibrin exudation, edema, calcification, arterial fibroblast proliferation, and trophoblastic
infarction. RNA-seq analysis showed that TEB mainly down-regulated the expression of iron transport
genes and up-regulated the expression of genes for immune/inflammatory responses. Further qPCR
showed that TEB down-regulated Tfrc, Hamp, Eif2ak2 and up-regulated the expression of Cd34, Cd36, Jag1,
Pln, Cyp1a1, Esrra, and Aqp1 at 50 and 100 mg/kg. Western blot and semi-quantitative immunohisto-
chemical staining also demonstrated that TEB lowered the levels of TFRC and EIF2AK2 and increased the
levels of CD34, CD36, JAG1, CYP1A1, and ESRRA at 50 and 100 mg/kg. In conclusion, TEB severely
damages the structure and function of the placenta, leading to hypertrophy of the placenta, low birth
weight and feminization of the male fetus possibly via several pathways including iron transport and TNF
signaling.

@ 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

\* Corresponding authors. Obstetrics and Gynecology, the Second Affiliated Hos-
pital and Yuying Children's Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou,
Zhejiang, 325027, PR China.

E-mail addresses: jieqianglu@126.com (J. Lu), r_ge@yahoo.com (R .- s. Ge).


## 1. Introduction

Exposure of environmental pesticides has been shown to be a
risk to human health, which is closely related to fetal growth and

<!-- PageFooter="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.128432 0045-6535/ 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Chemosphere 264 (2021) 128432" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Y. Ying, P. Pan, C. Zou et al." -->

development, birth defects, infertility, diabetes, and cancer
(Mostafalou and Abdollahi, 2017). Tebuconazole (TEB) is one of the
most commonly used broad-spectrum triazole fungicides for corn,
cereals, vegetables and fruits (Zhang et al., 2015a). TEB is also used
as a fungicide and antiseptic for industrial and building materials.
As crop yields increase, TEB spreads to the living environment
through air, soil and other means (Fenner et al., 2013). The esti-
mated half-life of TEB varies with soil and enantiomers, and fluc-
tuates from tens of days to 600 days (Strickland et al., 2004; Cui
et al., 2018). Its accumulation in mammals leads to various endo-
crine disorders, such as reproductive endocrine disorders, sexual
differentiation, mortality, and thyroid disease (Jacobsen et al., 2010;
Lv et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019). The endocrine-disrupting effects of
TEB have aroused great concern.

The placenta is an important organ in mammals. As the main
link between the mother and the fetus, it has more functions than
any other organ, including digestion, excretion, breathing, endo-
crine, and immune system (Maltepe and Fisher, 2015; Staud and
Karahoda, 2018). Trophoblast is the core unit of fetal growth, pro-
tection, and programming. Abnormal differentiation and function
of placental trophoblast cells may lead to serious maternal and
infant complications, such as pre-eclampsia, low birth weight
(LBW), premature infants, and malformations. By epigenetic effects,
it causes fetal programming health conditions, such as type 2 dia-
betes, metabolic syndrome, hypertension, and autism (Staud and
Karahoda, 2018).

At present, some studies have revealed the negative relationship
between fungicide exposure and fetal growth and development. A
TEB derivative epoxiconazole reduced estrogen levels in pregnant
rats, leading to placental degeneration and abnormal fetal ab-
sorption (Rey Moreno et al., 2013). Exposure to TEB during preg-
nancy may change the histological structure and function of the
placenta and have a serious negative impact on the growth and
development of the fetus. However, the effect of TEB exposure on
the structure and function of the placenta and fetal development is
unclear. Here, we report the effects of exposure to TEB during the
mid-late pregnancy on fetal placental growth and development
and possible mechanisms.


## 2. Materials and methods


### 2.1. Materials and animals

TEB was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Thirty
56-day-old female and fifteen 56-day-old male Sprague-Dawley
rats were obtained from Shanghai Shrek Animal Co (Shanghai,
China). The animal study was approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee of Wenzhou Medical University, and all
experiments were conducted in accordance with the approved
guidelines.


### 2.2. Animal treatments

The animals were housed in cages in the animal room with the
relative humidity of 45-55%, a temperature between 22 and 24 ℃,
and a 12 h light: 12 h dark schedule. Water and food were freely
available. The animals were adjusted for one week before mating.
When vaginal plug was observed in mating female rats, they were
randomly divided into four groups (six rats in each group): group A
(control, with corn oil as vehicle), group B (25 mg/kg TEB), group C
(50 mg/kg TEB), and group D (100 mg/kg TEB). TEB was dissolved in
corn oil and 1 ml/kg/day was gavaged to each rat. The concentra-
tions of TEB administered in the four experimental groups were 0,
25, 50, and 100 mg/kg/day, respectively. In the control group, rats
were gavaged with an equal amount of corn oil. The dose range of

TEB was based on a previous study, in which TEB was found to have
endocrine-disrupting effect on Leydig cells (Chen et al., 2019a).
Each dam was weighed at the beginning and end of the experiment.
TEB treatment started on the 12th day of pregnancy to 21 day,
which represents the late second trimester and third trimester
stages of human pregnancy. Ten days after TEB administration, rats
were euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation at GD21. It was reported that
TEB can virilize female fetuses and feminize male fetuses (Taxvig
et al., 2007). Therefore, the placenta to have male fetus was
selected as the research object in order to avoid the interference of
different genders on the experimental results and minimize the
existence of confounding factors. The weight of each male fetus,
anogenital distance (AGD), placental weight, diameter, thickness,
and placental weight ratio were recorded. A placenta was fixed in
Bouin's solution for histochemical analysis and another placenta
from the same female mouse was stored at -80 ℃ for subsequent
detection of gene and protein expression levels.


### 2.3. RNA-seq

RNA-seq was performed by Aksomics Inc (Shanghai, China) as
previously described (Wang et al., 2019). In brief, RNA-seq was
performed on Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform. FPKM value of gene
and transcript levels were calculated. Hierarchical clustering, gene
ontology, path analysis, scatter plots, and volcano plots were per-
formed for differentially expressed genes in R, Python, or Shell
environments for statistical calculation and graphical display.


### 2.4. Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR)

Total RNA was isolated from the placenta using Trizol as previ-
ously described (Wang et al., 2019), and the OD value was measured
at 260 nm under Thermo NanoDrop 2000 (Wilmington, NC) to
quantify RNA concentration. The expression level of placental genes
was judged by reverse transcription and qPCR (Wang et al., 2019).
Primers selected from RNA-seq candidate genes include Cd34, Cd36,
jagged typical gap ligand 1 (Jag1), hydroxysteroid 11ß-dehydroge-
nase 2 (Hsd11b2), cytochrome p450 family 1 subfamily member 1
(Cyp1a1), cytochrome p450 family 19 subfamily member 1
(Cyp19a1), claudin 11 (Cldn11), eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 2-alpha kinase 2 (Eif2ak2), fatty acid binding protein 4
(Fabp4), hepcidin antibacterial peptide (Hamp), transferrin receptor
(Tfrc), estrogen-related receptor alpha (Esrra), aquaporin 1 (Aqp1),
lamban phosphate (Pln), iodothyroxine deiodinase 2 (Dio2), BCL2
apoptosis regulator (Bcl2), gap junction protein beta 2 (Gjb2),
incomplete segment polar protein 1 (Dvl1), Enoyl-CoA hydratase,
short chain 1 (Echs1), growth arrest specificity 6 (Gas6), glucose
transporter 1 (Glut1), hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase trifunc-
tional multienzyme complex subunit ß (Hadhb), low density lipo-
protein receptor (Ldlr), solute carrier family 38 member 1 (Slc38a1),
solute carrier family 38 member 2 (Slc38a2), talin 1 (Tln1), solute
carrier family 1 member 5 (Slc1a5), adrenomedullin 2 (Adm2), NBL
analyzed a DAN family BMP antagonist (Nbl1), placental growth
factor (Pgf), and S100 calcium binding protein A4 (S100a4). qPCR
was performed using the SYBR Green qPCR kit (Takara, Otsu, Japan).
Ribosomal protein S16 (Rps16), a housekeeping gene, is used as an
internal reference to standardize the expression levels of the genes
detected above. The quality of PCR amplification of each sample
was controlled by a single peak melting curve. Ct values was
recorded and mRNA levels were quantified using the standard
curve method. All the information of the primers is shown in the
Supplementary Table S1.

<!-- PageNumber="2" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Chemosphere 264 (2021) 128432" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Y. Ying, P. Pan, C. Zou et al." -->


### 2.5. Western blot analysis

The protein sample preparation and Western blot analysis were
performed as previously described (Wang et al., 2019). In brief,
approximately 1 g of placental tissue was added to a radio-
immunoprecipitation buffer containing a protease inhibitor cock-
tail (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and 2 mM PMSF. After
homogenization by ultrasound on ice, the supernatant was
collected after centrifugation. The protein concentration was
detected using the BCA protein measurement kit (Takara, Otsu,
Japan). 25 µg of each protein sample was denatured, loaded, and
separated by SDS-PAGE and then electroblotted onto a poly-
vinylidene fluoride membrane (Amersham Biosciences/GE
Healthcare Little Chalfont, UK). The membrane was blocked, incu-
bated with primary antibodies against the following antigens,
CD34, CD36, JAG1, CYP1A1, TFRC, EIF2AK2, ESRRA, and ACTB
(control), linked with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated IgG sec-
ondary antibody. The bands were made visible by enhanced
chemiluminescence (Pierce Chemical Co., Rockford, IL). The in-
tensity of the band was analyzed with Image Lab 3.0 software (Bio-
Rad, USA). All information on primary and secondary antibodies is
listed in Supplementary Table S2.


### 2.6. ELISA for placental E2 levels

Placental E2 levels were measured by a commercial ELISA kit
using double antibody sandwich method as described (Chen et al.,
2019a). In brief, ultrasonic homogenization and centrifugation were
used to obtain placenta supernatant. The placenta supernatant and
biotin-labeled antibody were placed in 96-well plates, and the
mixture was incubated in a 37 ℃ incubator. After washing, the IgG
anti-E2 antibody bound to peroxidase was transferred to the
mixture and incubated and then E2 substrate solution was added,
and the reaction was stopped after 30 min. The OD value of E2 was
measured at a wavelength of 450 nm within 15 min, and the E2
concentration was obtained in units of pmol/L by drawing a stan-
dard curve.


### 2.7. Hematoxylin and eosin staining

The placenta was embedded in paraffin, cut into 2.5 um thick
sections, and attached to the glass slide. The sections were stained
with hematoxylin and eosin. The cross-sectional image of the
placenta was taken with NanoZoomer Digital Pathology (Hama-
matsu, Japan). The NDP view 2 software was used to record the
labyrinth area (LA), basal area (BA) and the thickness of the
placenta cross section. The following parameters were calculated:
LA ratio = LA/section thickness; BA ratio = BA/section thickness.
Placental section thickness contains LA, BA and decidual area (DA).


### 2.8. Immunohistochemical staining

The immunohistochemical staining was performed as described
earlier (Chen et al., 2019a). In brief, six semi-placentas of each
group were randomly selected for immunohistochemical staining
(ABC Kit, Vector Laboratory). The levels of CYP1A1, TFRC, CD34,
CD36 and JAG1 were detected. The placenta in each group was
dehydrated with xylene and ethanol, and then embedded in
paraffin. The paraffin-embedded sections (2.5 um) were dewaxed
and rehydrated and endogenous peroxidase was blocked. After the
primary antibody was incubated, the secondary antibody was
ligated and then the section was stained. Image-Pro Plus software
(Media Cybernetics, USA) was used to measure the density and
background of selected proteins. The information of primary and
secondary antibodies is shown in Supplementary Table S2.


### 2.9. Determination of ferrous ion concentration in placental tissue supernatant

Ultrasonic homogenization and centrifugation were used to
obtain the placental tissue supernatant. The BCA protein detection
kit was used to measure the protein concentration in the tissue
supernatant, and then the iron colorimetric kit (Leagene, China)
was used to measure the absorbance at 562 nm. Iron in placental
tissue supernatant (umol/g) = ([A determination - (A tissue *
0.97)]/A standard) * 35.8/placental tissue protein concentration (g/
L) (A determination referred to the absorbance value of placental
tissue supernatant; A tissue meant the tissue absorbance value
before adding iron chromogenic agent; A standard represented
standard iron absorbance).


### 2.10. Statistics

All data are expressed as mean ± standard error (SEM). One-way
analysis of variance followed by ad hoc Dunnett's multiple com-
parison analysis were performed using GraphPad software (version
8.0.2, GraphPad Prism software, San Diego, CA). P values less than
0.05 are considered statistically significant.


## 3. Results


### 3.1. TEB increases placental weight and thickness

In group D (100 mg/kg TEB), the weight of the male fetus
decreased significantly by TEB, while the placental weight
increased, and the weight ratio of the fetus to the placenta
decreased (Table 1). Compared with the control (Group A), the AGD
of male fetuses in groups B, C, and D was all reduced (Table 1). The
placental thickness in groups C and D was significantly higher than
that in group A (the control) and group B. There was no statistical


<table>
<caption>Table 1 Basic information of fetus and placenta.</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Basic information</th>
<th colspan="4">TEB doses (Group)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>A (0 mg/kg)</th>
<th>B (25 mg/kg)</th>
<th>C (50 mg/kg)</th>
<th>D (100 mg/kg)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male fetal rat weight (g)</td>
<td>5.66 ± 0.07</td>
<td>5.49 ± 0.13</td>
<td>5.45 ± 0.14</td>
<td>5.12 ± 0.09 ***</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>AGD (mm)</td>
<td>3.21 ± 0.05</td>
<td>2.97 ± 0.07 **</td>
<td>2.97 ± 0.06*</td>
<td>2.94 ± 0.07 **</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Placental weight (g)</td>
<td>0.52 ± 0.02</td>
<td>0.57 ± 0.03</td>
<td>0.58 ± 0.03</td>
<td>0.65 ± 0.02 ***</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Placental diameter (mm)</td>
<td>15.04 ± 0.14</td>
<td>14.61 ± 0.24</td>
<td>14.88 ± 0.23</td>
<td>15.53 ± 0.20</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Placental thickness (mm)</td>
<td>2.59 ± 0.06</td>
<td>2.63 ± 0.12</td>
<td>2.88 ± 0.09*</td>
<td>2.91 ± 0.10*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetal-placental weight ratio</td>
<td>11.36 ± 0.35</td>
<td>10.32 ± 0.50</td>
<td>10.75 ±0.45</td>
<td>8.11 ± 0.34 ***</td>
</tr>
</table>

AGD: anogenital distance.

Placental thickness contains abyrinth area (LA), basal area (BA) and decidual area (DA).

*, ** , *** indicate significant difference when compared to the control (A) at P < 0.05, 0.01, 0.001, respectively.


<!-- PageNumber="3" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Y. Ying, P. Pan, C. Zou et al." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Chemosphere 264 (2021) 128432" -->

difference in placental diameter between the four groups (Table 1).

3.2. TEB reduces E2 levels and increases Fe2+ level in the placental
tissue supernatant

E2 is an important hormone synthesized by the placenta and
can maintain normal placental function. Rats were exposed to TEB
during pregnancy for 10 days (Fig. 1a). After measuring the E2 level
in the placental tissue, the E2 level in the placenta of group D
decreased significantly after TEB treatment (Fig. 1b). Moreover, af-
ter measuring the Fe2+ level, the Fe2+ level in the placental tissue
supernatant of group D increased significantly after TEB treatment


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 1. Experimental design for tebuconazole (TEB) treatment and placental estradiol (E2) levels and placental tissue supernatant Fe2+ levels. Panel a, regimen (here and below): The dams were divided into 4 groups: groups A (0 mg/kg), B (25 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) and were gavaged with TEB from gestational day (GD) 12-21; Panel b, placental E2 level. Mean + SEM, n = 6. * designates a significant difference when compared with the control (group A) at P &lt; 0.05. Panel c, placental tissue supernatant Fe2+ level. Mean ± SEM, n = 6. ** designates a significant difference when compared with the control (group A) at P &lt; 0.01.</figcaption>

TEB dose (
group A: 0

group B: 25

Termination

a

group C: 50

group D: 100
mg/kg, p.o.)

GDO

GD12

GD21

b

Placental E2 level

40

E2 (pmol/L)

30

20

\*

10

0

A

B

C

D

TEB treatment group

C

Placental supernatant
Fe2+ level

4

**

Fe2+ (umol/g)

3

2

1

0

A

B

C

D

TEB treatment group

</figure>


(Fig. 1c). This indicates that TEB disrupts the metabolism of estro-
gen and iron homeostasis in the placenta.

3.3. TEB increases the thickness of placental basal area and causes
pathological changes in the placenta

The placenta is divided into LA, BA and the outermost decidual
area (Fig. 2a). After HE staining, there was no significant difference
in the proportion of LA in the placenta among the four groups
(Fig. 2b). However, the proportion of BA in the placenta increased in
group B, C, and D when compared to the group A (Fig. 2c). This
indicates that TEB affects placental structure. Morphologically,
fibrin exudation was found in the TEB-treated placentas and fibrin
exudation was mainly present in the LA, and occasionally in the BA.
However, in group D, TEB significantly increased the degree of
fibrin exudation (Fig. 3a-d). TEB induced edema in the trophoblast
space of in LA and BA in a dose-dependent manner with the most
serious edema in group D (Fig. 3e-h). TEB can also induce calcifi-
cation in a dose-dependent manner. Compared with group A,
calcification was mainly seen in LA, and most of the calcification
lesions were located near the insertion point of the umbilical cord.
We also found that there was a small amount of neutrophil infil-
tration near the calcification position in group D (Fig. 3i- 1).
Fibroblast proliferation can be seen in the vessel walls in groups C
and D. The cellulose in the arterial wall diffused significantly to the
center of the lumen, causing the arterial lumen to become signifi-
cantly narrowed or even occluded (Fig. 30-p). These pathological
changes were mainly seen in LA. There was obvious trophoblastic
infarction in the BA of TEB-treated groups. The cell outline of tro-
phoblasts in BA still existed, but the trophoblast nucleus dissolved
and disappeared (Fig. 3r-t). These indicate that TEB adversely in-
duces pathological changes in the placenta.


#### 3.4. TEB induces molecular biological changes in placenta

In order to explore the molecular mechanism of TEB on the
placenta, we performed RNA-seq analysis. We selected placental
samples from group A (control group), group C and group D for
RNA-seq. 13,821-13839 transcripts were identified in all samples. A
heat map was used to compare groups C and A, showing the dif-
ferential expression of the genes (Fig. 4a). The volcano plot showed
that 166 genes in group C were down-regulated, while 329 genes
were up-regulated by 1.5 times (Fig. 4b). Among the down-
regulated genes, the top 10 GO categories in biological function
are mostly negative immune/inflammatory responses (Fig. 4c).
Among the up-regulated genes, the top 10 GO categories in bio-
logical function are mainly immune/inflammatory responses
(Fig. 4d). We also compared the gene profiles between group D and
group A. The heat map showed the differential expression of the
genes (Fig. 4e). The volcano plot showed that 236 genes were
down-regulated, while 329 genes were up-regulated by 1.5 times
(Fig. 4f). Among the down-regulated genes in group D, the top 10
GO categories in biological function were similar to those in group C
(Fig. 4g). We analyzed the up-regulated genes in group D (Fig. 4h).
Three of the top 10 GO categories were immune/inflammatory re-
sponses, which were similar to those in Group C. However, 7 of
these 10 GO categories were signal receptor regulation, response to
lipids, inflammation, phylogeny, female pregnancy, response to
hormones, and anatomical development (Fig. 4h). This indicates
that TEB treatment can cause immune and inflammatory reactions,
and the placenta in group D has more serious changes related to
structural and developmental pathway.

We used qPCR to verify changes in the RNA-seq genes. We
selected some down-regulated genes (Tfrc, Hamp, and Eif2ak2,
Fig. 5) and up-regulated genes (Cd34, Cd36, Jag1, Pln, Cyp1a1, Esrra,

<!-- PageNumber="4" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Y. Ying, P. Pan, C. Zou et al." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Chemosphere 264 (2021) 128432" -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 2. Thickness of BA increased after tebuconazole (TEB) treatment. Panel a, HE staining of the placenta of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), B (25 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB. Panel b, the radius of the labyrinth area (LA); Panel c, the radius of the base area (BA). Mean ± SEM, n = 6. No significant difference was observed among groups for LA data. *** designates a significant difference when compared with the control (group A) at P &lt; 0.001 for BA data.</figcaption>

a

LA

BA

A

B

C

D

TEB treatment group

b

C

LA

BA

Radius of LA (mm)

1.0

Radius of BA (mm)

0.3

0.8

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.1

0.2

0.0

0.0

A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

TEB treatment group

TEB treatment group

</figure>


and Aqp1, Fig. 5) in top GO categories as well as many randomly
selected genes (Bcl2, Gjb2, Dvl1, Echs1, Gas6, Glut1, Hadhb, Hsd11b2,
Slc38a1, Slc38a2, Tln1, Slc1a5, Adm2 Cldn11, Ndl1, Fabp4, S100a4, Pgf,
and Ldlr, Dio2, Supplementary Fig. S1). The Ct value of Cyp19a1 was
about 38 cycles, which means that Cyp19a1 cannot be detected in
placental samples. Indeed, qPCR confirmed the similar changes to
RNA-seq gene expression.


### 3.5. TEB alters placental metabolic and signaling pathways

We further conducted a gene pathway analysis. Compared with

group A, group C + D has the following pathway changes. Among
the down-regulated gene pathways, the first 10 pathways were
enriched (Fig. 6a), including iron transport, arachidonic acid
metabolism, linoleic acid metabolism, and chemokine signaling.
Indeed, in the iron transport pathway, Tfrc, Slc11a2, Slc40a1, and
Alox15 were down-regulated (Fig. 6b) and in arachidonic acid
metabolism pathway, Ptgs2, Pla2g1b and Alox15 were down-
regulated (Supplementary Fig. S2). Among the up-regulated gene
pathways, the following 10 pathways include arginine/proline
metabolism, hematopoietic cell lineage, chemokine/cytokine re-
ceptor signaling, TNF signaling, histidine metabolism and

<!-- PageNumber="5" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Y. Ying, P. Pan, C. Zou et al." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Chemosphere 264 (2021) 128432" -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 3. Pathological changes of placentas after tebuconazole (TEB) treatment. HE staining of the placentas of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), B (25 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB. Panels a-d: fibrin exudation; Panels e-h: edema Panels i-1: calcification; Panels o-p: cellulose occlusion; Panels r-t: fibroblast infarction. phagosomes (Fig. 7a). Up-regulated genes include many cell adhesion molecules such as Cd34 (Fig. 7b), genes in Toll-like re- ceptor signaling pathway (Supplementary Fig. S3) and TNF signaling (Supplementary Fig. S4).</figcaption>

Exudation

a

b

C

d

Edema

e

f

g

h

Calcification

i

j

k

I

3%

Occlusion

m

n

O

p

0

Infarction

q

r

S

t

A

B

C

D

TEB treatment group

</figure>


### 3.6. TEB changes placental protein levels

We used Western blot to detect JAG1, TFRC, CD36, CD34,
EIF2AK2, CYP1A1, and ESRRA. We found that TEB significantly

<!-- PageNumber="6" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Y. Ying, P. Pan, C. Zou et al." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Chemosphere 264 (2021) 128432" -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 4. RNA-seq analysis of placentas after tebuconazole (TEB) treatment. RNA-seq of the placentas of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB. Panels a and e: heatmap for group C vs. group A and group D vs group A; Panels b and f: volcano plots for group C vs. group A and group D vs group A; Panels c and g: GO categories of down-regulated genes in biological function for group C vs. group A and group D vs group A . Panels d and h: GO categories of up-regulated genes in biological function for group C vs. group A and group D vs group A. In Panels a, b, e, f: green color indicates down-regulation and red color indicates up-regulation. . (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)</figcaption>

a

b

Group

5

\- Log10(p value)

4

3

2

\-

0

-2

0

2

A1 A2 A3 A4 C1 C2 C3 C4

Log2(fold change)

C

d

Down-regulated genes in Group C

Up-regulated genes in Group C

negative regulation of viral process (10 genes)-

immune response (60 genes)-

negative regulation of viral life cycle (11 genes)-

defense response (62 genes)-

defense response to virus (7 genes)-

immune system process (78 genes)-

regulation of viral life cycle (10 genes)-

inflammatory response (36 genes)-

regulation of viral process (11 genes)-

regulation of immune system (60 genes)-

negative regulation of viral genome 7 genes)-

positive regulation of immune system (46 genes)-

defense response to other microorganism (16 genes)-

response to cytokine (47 genes)-

response to cytokine (26 genes)-

response to lipopolysaccharide (32 genes)-

response to virus (11 genes)-

response to bacterium (40 genes)-

positive regulation of defense response to virus (5 genes)-

response to lipid (54 genes).

0

2

4

6

8

10

0

5

10

15

20

25

Enrichment Score

Enrichment Score

e

f

5

\- Log10(p value)

4

3

2

\-

0

A1 A2 A3 A4 D1 D2 D3 D4

-2

0

2

Log2(fold change)

g

h

Down-regulated genes in Group D

Up-regulated genes in Group D

negative regulation of viral genome replication (9 genes)-

regulation of signaling receptor (54 genes)-

negative regulation of viral genome process (11 genes)-

response to lipid (77 genes)-

negative regulation of viral life cycle (10 genes).

inflammatory response (41 genes)-

defense response to virus (12 genes).

defense response to other microorganism (19 genes)-

system development (178 genes)-

regulation of viral genome replication (9 genes)-

female pregnancy (30 genes)-

developmental process (205 genes)-

regulation of viral process (12 genes)-

response to biotic stimulation (28 genes)

response to hormone (70 genes)-

regulation of immune system (71 genes)-

response to virus (13 genes)-

anatomic structure development (194 genes)-

response to other organism (27 genes).

defense response (64 genes).

0

2

4

6

8

10

0

5

10

15

20

Enrichment Score

Enrichment Score

</figure>


<!-- PageNumber="7" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Y. Ying, P. Pan, C. Zou et al." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Chemosphere 264 (2021) 128432" -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 5. Gene expression in tebuconazole (TEB)-treated placentas measured by qPCR. qPCR of the placental mRNAs of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), B (25 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB. Placental genes: Tfrc, Hamp, Eif2ak2, Cd34, Cd36, Jag1, Pln, Cyp1a1, Esrra, and Aqp1. Mean ± SEM, n = 6. * , ** , *** indicate significant differences when compared to the control (panel A) at P &lt; 0.05, 0.01, 0.001, respectively.</figcaption>

Tfrc

Hamp

8000

40

6000

30

4000

Hamp

***

20

**

***

2000

** *

10

* **

0

0

A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

Eif2ak2

CD34

300

20

**

200

15

\*

\*

10

100

5

0

0

A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

mRNA levels relative to Rps16 (103)

CD36

Jag1

80

15

\*

**

60

\*

10

40

20

5

0

0

A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

Pin

Cyp1a1

150

80

\*

\*

\* \*

100

60

Cypla1

40

50

20

0

0

A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

Esrra

Aqp1

80

1500

60

**

\*

\*

Esrra

1000

40

20

500

0

0

A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

TEB treatment group

</figure>


<!-- PageNumber="8" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Y. Ying, P. Pan, C. Zou et al." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Chemosphere 264 (2021) 128432" -->

a

Down-regulation in Group C&D


<figure>

Influenza A (8 genes)

Measles (7 genes):

Iron transport (4 genes)

Herpes simplex infection (7 genes)

Hepatitis C (5 genes)

Herpesvirus infection (6 genes)

Arachidonic acid metabolism (4 genes).

Linoleic acid metabolism (3 genes)

Chemokine signaling (6 genes)

Hepatitis B (4 genes):

0

2

4

6

b

Enrichment Score

</figure>


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 6. Gene pathway analysis of down-regulated genes in placentas after tebuconazole (TEB) treatment. RNA-seq of the placentas of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB; Genes in groups C + D were compared to those in group A. Panel a: Top 10 pathways in the down-regulated genes of groups C + D; Panel b: Iron transport pathway. Green color indicates down-regulation. . (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)</figcaption>

Erastin
Sorafenib
Glutamate

PE-AA-OH/
PE-AdA-OH

System Xc

Gclc

Gss

RSI 3

Sulfasalazine

Sic3a2

Cysteine

Vitamin E

Satt

Tp53

Cystine

yOc

OSH

Gpx4

Sic7a11

Glutathione metabolism

Glutamate

GSSC

Alox15

Lpcat3

Acsi4

ISe

e

PE-AA-O-OHJ
PE-AdA-O-OH

Tp53

PE-AA/
PE-AdA

AA-CoAJ

AdA-CoA

Tfrc

Acetyl.Co.A

LysoPE

AA/AdA

Fe3+

Tf

Tfrc

Tt

IPP

Fe3+

Terpenoid backbone
biosynthesis

Tfrc

Steap3

Tf

Fe2+

HMG-COA

MVA

CoQ10

Cp

Fe3+

Sic11a2

Sic39a8

Empetin

Vdac2

Mitochondria

Endosome

Cybb

Ferroptosis

Fé

Ftmt

ROS

Pcbp2

Fe2

Sic40a1

Fenton reaction

Fe-+

Fe2+

Fe

Sic39a8

Pcbp2

F+3+

Pmp

Fe3+

Here

Hmox1

Fe

Map1ic3a

Ncoa4 00360087

Ferritin degradation
Released iron

( Non-TF bound iron )

100360087
Iron Storage

Alg7

Autolyosome

Data on KEGG graph
Rendered by Pathview

</figure>


reduced the levels of TFRC and EIF2AK2 in groups C and D, and
significantly increased the levels of JAG1, CD36, CD34, CYP1A1, and
ESRRA in groups C and/or D (Fig. 8). The protein levels paralleled
their mRNA changes. We used immunohistochemical staining to
identify CD34, CD36, JAG1, CYP1A1, and TFRC protein levels. We
found that the CD34 protein is expressed in the cytoplasm and
cytoplasm of trophoblasts of LA, BA and DA in the placenta and in
the cytoplasm of placental vascular endothelial cells. Density data
showed that TEB significantly increased CD34 protein levels in
groups C and D (Fig. 9a-d). CD36 protein was positively found in
the cell membranes of trophoblasts and vascular endothelial cells,
and they were only expressed in placental LA, but not in placenta
BA and DA. TEB increased the density of CD36 in groups C and D
(Fig. 9e-h). JAG1 and CYP1A1 proteins were positive in the
trophoblast cytoplasm of placenta LA, BA and DA, as well as their
concentrations of vascular endothelial cytoplasm were increased in
groups C and D (Fig. 9i-p). with the increase of TEB dose concen-
tration (Fig. 9i-p) and TEB were increased in groups C and D. TFRC
protein was mainly in the trophoblast membrane of placenta LA
and weakly positive in the cytoplasm of placenta BA and DA

trophoblasts. TEB significantly reduced the TFRC protein density in
groups B, C, and D (Fig. 9q-t). Interestingly, we observed that the
density of TFRC protein in the trophoblast space of placental LA was
different, and the expression intensity of LA near the surface of BA
and fetus was stronger than that of middle LA (Fig. 9). Although the
expression of TFRC in trophoblasts in BA was not high, we still
observed a significant decrease in the expression of TFRC in
placenta BA in groups C and D (Fig. 9c and d).


## 4. Discussion

The placenta is an important organ between the fetus and
mother and plays a vital role in maintaining fetal development. This
study shows that TEB exposure during pregnancy can severely
disrupt the structure and function of the placenta, leading to hy-
pertrophy of the placenta, and LBW in male fetuses. TEB also
reduced AGD, a biomarker of androgen action, and a decrease in
AGD in the male fetus indicates a lack of androgen in male
offspring, consistent with the previous observation (Taxvig et al.,
2007).

<!-- PageNumber="9" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Y. Ying, P. Pan, C. Zou et al." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Chemosphere 264 (2021) 128432" -->

a

Up-regulation in Group C&D


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 7. Gene pathway analysis of up-regulated genes in placentas after tebuconazole (TEB) treatment. RNA-seq of the placentas of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB; Genes in groups C + D were compared to those in group A. Panel a: Top 10 pathways in the up-regulated genes of groups C + D; Panel b: Cell adhesion molecules. Red color indicates up-regulation. . (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)</figcaption>

Arginine/proline metabolism (9 genes)

Staphylococcus aureus infection (8 genes)

Rheumatoid arthritis (9 genes)

Hematopoietic cell lineage (6 genes)

Chemokine signaling (12 genes)

TNF signaling (9 genes)

Cytokine-cytokine receptor (13 genes)

Prion diseases (5 genes)

Phagosome (11 genes)

Histidine metabolism (4 genes)

0

2

4

6

8

Enrichment Score

b

NEURAL SYSTEM

OTHER SYSTEMS

CELL ADHESION MOLECULES

Endothelial cells

Leukocyte

Endothelial

Nezon

Newon

Schwann cell

IMMUNE SYSTEM

tic)

Newon

Epithelial cells

APC

dectin1

Jecting

(DC, Macrophage)

TCell

Cytotoxic

Target cell

Cidr23

F11r

F11r

Node

Ckan23

Nectin

Nectin1

Sdc3

Nicam

Ocin

Ocin

CD38

\-
Cd2

Cd2

CD5B

Ocin

Ocin

ICAM3

Cdh2

a

Cdh2

Nfasc

Cd26

9

Co00

F11r

F11r

Paranode

F11r

F11

Cd274

Cd274

hgal

Ncamt

Jarr2

Jam2

Icart

Vcam1

Nfasc

Cntn1

Ontap!

lectin

Nectin1

Cd28

TRAV14

Feptxle

1gb2

RT1-A1

1cam

Licam

Juda-

Cdh1

Cdh

Cd88

Ctla

Casa

lam3

Jam3

hgam

Icam2

Cadmi

Cadmt

Ico sig

Icos

Cntr2

Cntn2

Cadmi

Cadı

lg al

Esam

Esam

Negri

Negr1

Chinape

Peptide

Jam3

T1-D.

H

RAV1482

Cdh5

Cdh5

JamG

Ticht

(Th)

Cd40

liga4

\-

LITOAC

junction

A

Schwann cell (myelin)

Cd226

PVR

Pecam1

ecam

1gb1

Jam2

Ning2

\-

LITCA

Peptide

nlmperiod

Adherens

RT1-A1

OHTRAV1482

İgit

Nectin2

Cd99

Cd99

Papri

4

Mpz

Mpz

Nectin3
TT

Vcart

Sdc3

Sdc3

Spermatid

Sertoli cell

Casa

Tight junction

Mag

Mag

X274

?

Helper

B Cel

liga4

?

Cdh1

S
Adod

Leukocyte

hgb8

Cdh1

Cdh

Cdh2

Cdh2

ladcam1

Cd276

7

CD58

magation

,

liga8

hgb1

Oligodendrocyte

Neuroa

NectinJ

Nectin2

Vion

?

Cd28

4

G

Leukocyte

Platelet

Sell

Glycam

Nrain3

Nign1

(myelin)

hga6

d274

A

Cd86

ngam

Cd34

Node

lgbt

C340

Cd40ig

Jam3

Nicam

I

Peptide

Selpig

Nemcon
(growth cone)

Neuron

Acam

Cd6

Se plo

Seip

Vcan

TRAV14S

RT1-Da

Nfasc

Ciliary body

Salp

Non-pigment

Cntn1

PENHA

epitelia

PVR
I

Cd4

Gig1

Solo

Cadma

Cadima

Paranode

Nfasc

Cntn1

Nectin1

vectina

Nectin2

Cd401

1

Cd40

hgal

(Thi)

ICATE

ecami

Nicam

Cnt1

1gb2

Cntnapt

Necon3

vecin

Cd226

?

Cd127

Piprm

Ptprm

Can3

Con3

Igal

Cdgg

Cd99

1gb2

Icame

Pdod1

adco1

7

Platelet

Endothelial

Cnt2

Ncamt

Ncamt

Cntn2

Ontnap2

Myoblasts

cam2

Igal

cam2

ngal

camz

P

PVR

ngu2

F111

F11r

Cd226

Cdh2

4

\-

Cdh2

ng al

Nectin2

Critn2

Oligodendrocyto (myelin)

Pipro

cam2

Cdh4

\-

Ch

Cd22

Cd-4Dic

Cd40

.1cam

Licam

Intraperiod

(M)

Cd2

CDS8

Con15

Can15

Sigluci

tprc

CA122

Pacam1

Racami

Cơh2

Cdh2

Clon11

Cidin11

Neo

T

L

T cell receptor
sapaling pathway

Complaboral und
coagulation casesde

Leukocyte

transendothelel

Data on KEGG graph
Rendered by Pathvww

</figure>


The fetus must obtain nutrition (including iron) and oxygen
from the mother through the placenta. If the placenta does not
provide adequate nutrition, LBW will occur (Zhang et al., 2015b). As
our results in Table 1 indicate, LBW fetuses delivered by pregnant
rats suffer from placental hypertrophy. The adaptability of placental
morphology and/or function determines the ability and efficiency
of placental substrates (including oxygen, fatty acids, glucose,
amino acids, and iron) to be transferred to the fetus (Kwan et al.,
2017).

The weight and size of the placenta affect its ability to transfer
nutrient substrates, which varies with environmental endocrine
disrupting compounds and animal models (Barker and Thornburg,
2013). This in turn affects the placental efficiency (defined as the
placenta-to-weight ratio) (Krombeen et al., 2019). In general, the
placental efficiency of normal late pregnant rats exceeds 10
(Norman and Bruce, 1979). However, in this study, placental effi-
ciency decreased with increasing TEB dose. The placental efficiency
of TEB in group D was only 8.1, which was much lower than that in

group A (control) (Table 1). This indicates that the prenatal expo-
sure of TEB seriously affects the efficiency of the placenta and re-
duces the transport efficiency of nutrient substrate per gram of
placenta weight.

The placenta of most LBW babies is a small placenta. Morpho-
logical adaptation increases nutrient transport capacity, such as
increased relative surface area, vascularity, and reduced thickness
of placental nutrient exchange barrier (Zhang et al., 2015b). On the
contrary, this study showed that the placenta was hypertrophy. The
weight and thickness of the placental barrier increased, but the
placental diameter did not change (Table 1). It is worth noting that
the increase in placental thickness is mainly due to the increase in
BA without affecting LA thickness (Fig. 2), which is similar to the
study of ketoconazole on pregnant rats (Furukawa et al., 2008). In
their study, ketoconazole exposure was performed during GD12-
14, the thickness of both LA and BA increased, but the fetal
weight did not change (Furukawa et al., 2008).

Although there was no difference in LA thickness between the

<!-- PageNumber="10" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Y. Ying, P. Pan, C. Zou et al." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Chemosphere 264 (2021) 128432" -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 8. Western blot analysis of protein levels in tebuconazole (TEB)-treated placentas. Western blot of the placental protein levels of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), B (25 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB. Panel a: Western blot image; Panel b: protein levels of TFRC, EIF2AK2, JAG1, CD34, CD36, CYP1A1, ESRRA. Mean + SEM, n = 4-6. * , ** , *** indicate significant differences when compared to the control (group A) at P &lt; 0.05, 0.01, 0.001, respectively.</figcaption>

TFRC

EIF2AK2

1.5-

1.0

0.8

1.0-

0.6

\*

***

\*

***

0.5

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.0

TFRC

95kDa

A

B

C

D

0

25

50

100

JAG1

CD34

EIF2AK2

58kDa

1.5

0.4

***

\*

**

JAG1

1.0

0.3

150kDa

\*

Protein/ACTB

0.2

CD34

120kDa

0.5

0.1

0.0

CD36

85kDa

A

B

c

D

0.0

A

B

C

D

CD36

CYP1A1

CYP1A1

58kDa

1.5

\*

1.0

\*

0.8

ESRRA

50kDa

1.0

0.6

0.5

0.4

ACTB

43kDa

0.2

0.0

0.0

ABCD
TEB treatment

A

B

c

D

A

B

c

D

ESRRA

1.0-

0.8-

\*

0.6-

0.4

0.2-

0.0

A

B

C

D

TEB treatment

</figure>


TEB-treated group and the control group, the tissue structure of the
TEB-treated group had serious pathological changes in LA,
including fibrin exudation, edema, calcification, and proliferation of
fibroblasts in the arterial wall (Fig. 3a-p).

Fibrin exudation is a manifestation at the end of a normal
pregnancy and is believed to contribute to the successful separation
of the placenta and uterus during labor. However, the excessive
increase in exudate is not conducive to the natural delivery of the
placenta. Due to hypoxia in the placenta, it may reduce the nutri-
tional supply of the fetus (Sapin et al., 1997). CD34 positive cells are
considered to have adhesion function. According to reports, Wnt/
Ca2+ signal transduction pathway-induced adhesion protein
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) is the basic component
of primary human placental cell angiogenesis. Wnt-5a can stimu-
late the migration of CD133+ CD34+ cells and induce their adhesion
(Herr et al., 2014). In our study, we found that a variety of cell

adhesion proteins, including CD34, CD36, and ICAM-1, which are
important in leukocyte transendothelial migration (Fig. 7b).

The amount of amniotic fluid in the uterus during late preg-
nancy is closely related to fetal development (Fitzsimmons and
Bajaj, 2020). AQP1 (encoded by Aqp1) has been shown to main-
tain the permeability of the placenta to water, and then affect the
amount of amniotic fluid and ultimately affect the growth and
development of the fetus (Belkacemi et al., 2008). Our study found
that the placental Aqp1 expression was up-regulated (Fig. 5), which
resulted in an increase in the amount of water in the placental LA
and caused significant edema (Fig. 3g and h). However, the thick-
ening of the arterial wall led to the narrowing of the official cavity,
which made the increase in water in the placenta unevenly
replenished to the amniotic fluid, affecting the growth and devel-
opment of the fetus (Fig.3o and p). In the trophoblast cell line HTR-
8/JEG-3, it was found that AQP1 played a crucial role in the balance

<!-- PageNumber="11" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 9. Immunohistochemical staining of proteins of placentas after tebuconazole (TEB) treatment. Immunohistochemical staining of the placentas of TEB-treated rats from groups A (0 mg/kg), B (25 mg/kg), C (50 mg/kg), and D (100 mg/kg) TEB. Panels a-d: CD34; Panels e-h: CD36; Panels i-1: JAG1; Panels m-p: CYP1A1; Panels q-t: TFRC. Panel u: quantitative density of proteins of CD34, CD36, JAG1, CYP1A1, TFRC. Mean + SEM, n = 6. ** , *** indicate significant differences when compared to the control (group A) at P &lt; 0.01, 0.001, respectively.</figcaption>

a

b,

C

d

CD34

e

f

g

CD36

3

k

JAG1

m

CYP1A1

n

O

p

q

r

S

t

TFRC

Arbitary unit £

A

B

C

D

CD34 Density

CD36 Density

JAG1 Density

CYP1A1 Density

TFRC Density

0.3

0.4

0.3

0.4-

0.5

**

***

***

***

***

0.2

0.3

***

0.2-

***

0.3

**

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.3

**

******

0.1

0.1

0.2-

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

TEB treatment

</figure>


<!-- PageNumber="12" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Chemosphere 264 (2021) 128432" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Y. Ying, P. Pan, C. Zou et al." -->

of fetus-placenta-amniotic fluid (Belkacemi et al., 2008). Some re-
searchers have pointed out that this edema is caused by vascular
leakage of the placental LA (Sapin et al., 1997). In addition, in our
study, TEB increased the proliferation of fibroblasts in the arterial
wall and increased the osmotic pressure of blood flow in the
vascular lumen (Fig.3o and p), which in turn supported the path-
ological interpretation of placental edema. CD34, CD36, JAG1, and
CYP1A1 are the four positive markers of vascular endothelium,
which was positively correlated with TEB dose, confirming the
thickening of the blood vessel wall and the increase of placental
edema.

Placental calcification is very common, but due to the limita-
tions of clinical research, the relationship between placental calci-
fication and fetal growth and development is not clear (Mastrolia
et al., 2016). Placental calcification is mainly related to abnormal
placental calcium transport (Segawa et al., 2015). The main
component of mouse placental calcification is calcium phosphate,
similar to humans (Akirav et al., 2005). Three pathways for
placental calcification have been revealed, namely physiological,
malnutrition and metastatic calcification (Mastrolia et al., 2016).
This study found that placental calcification was mainly concen-
trated in placental LA, which is consistent with the results of other
researchers (Wallingford et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2020). Moreover, the
degree of calcification was most severe in group D (100 mg/kg TEB)
(Fig. 3). The reason for calcification in LA is unclear. Because LA is
the main place for maternal and infant nutrition substrate ex-
change, we speculate that the placental calcification in this study is
metastatic calcification. Throughout pregnancy, calcium is actively
transported through placental trophoblast cells to meet the needs
of fetal bone growth in the uterus. However, TEB mainly interfered
with the active calcium transport of trophoblast cells by down-
regulating the expression of EIF2AK2 protein in trophoblast cells
and then down-regulating the downstream signaling pathways of
Ripk1 and Ripk3. It caused placental calcium to passively diffuse
back to the maternal circulation through calcium enrichment in the
placental environment, and promoted the formation and deposi-
tion of calcium in the form of phosphate in placental LA (Figs. 5-7).
In addition, phospholamban (PLN) may play a key role in calcium
homeostasis (Frank and Kranias, 2000). In this experiment, we
found that the Pln expression was up-regulated by TEB, indicating
that TEB may influence the homeostasis of calcium homeostasis.

This study clearly showed that the E2 level of group D was
significantly reduced (Fig. 1b). The mechanism by which TEB in-
hibits E2 secretion is unclear. However, previous studies have
shown that TEB can directly inhibit the activity of aromatase
(CYP19A1) (Chen et al., 2019b). We checked the results of the RNA
sequence of 13,950 total genes. The FPKM value of Cyp19a1 gene is
so low that it was undetectable. In addition, the Ct value of Cyp19a1
in the placental samples were over 38, indicating that Cyp19a1 level
is almost undetectable. Therefore, we think that the expression of
Cyp19a1 in rat placenta is very low, and the reduction of E2 level
may be not due to Cyp19a1 expression in the placenta. The effect of
TEB on Cyp19a1 in other tissues or its direct inhibition on CYP19A1
activity in the body or its effect on E2 metabolic enzymes may be
involved. Regarding E2 metabolizing enzymes, CYP1A1 is a meta-
bolic enzyme that is a member of the cytochrome P450 family and
can metabolize E2 to 2-hydroxyestradiol in extrahepatic tissues
such as the placenta (Tsuchiya et al., 2005). Overexpression of
CYP1A1 in human placental JEG-3 cells reduced the level of E2 (Xu
et al., 2019). Our results similarly showed that TEB up-regulated the
expression of Cyp1a1 (Fig. 5) and its protein (Fig. 8), resulting in a
decrease in E2 levels. In addition, we found that the levels of Esrra
gene and protein were up-regulated by TEB. Perhaps, Esrra may be
involved in the regulation of E2 metabolism by Cyp1a1 (Giguère,

2002).

Although iron is essential for fetal development and maternal
health during pregnancy, there are still many unknown mysteries
in the regulation of iron metabolism in the placenta and the fetal
mother, and the molecular details of iron transport in the placenta
are still poorly understood (Cao and Fleming, 2016; Fisher and
Nemeth, 2017; Guo et al., 2019). Impaired placental iron transport
can lead to impaired fetal growth in the uterus (Mando et al., 2011;
Sun et al., 2013; Gomez-Gutierrez et al., 2019). In a healthy preg-
nancy in the second and third trimester, the concentration of
maternal HAMP (hepcidin) is suppressed, thereby increasing the
iron supply in the blood circulation (Fisher and Nemeth, 2017).
HAMP is a key hormone synthesized in the liver and can regulate
the iron homeostasis of various organic systems (Ganz, 2006). The
iron content in trophoblasts is mainly controlled by two regulatory
proteins. The TFRC protein located on the trophoblast membrane
controls iron input to the trophoblast (Briana et al., 2013; Fisher and
Nemeth, 2017) (also shown in Fig. 6b). Another protein, SLC40A1, is
the only protein that controls iron output from trophoblasts. HAMP
can inhibit iron outflow from the trophoblast by combining with
SLC40A1 (Nemeth et al., 2004; Ganz, 2006).

The relationship between E2 and iron steady state is complex. At
present, there are few related studies in this field. Some studies
have shown that changes in E2 levels affect key iron transport
genes, including Hamp, Tfrc and Slc40a1. Studies on the ovariecto-
mized mouse model of E2 deficiency have shown that it greatly
promoted iron homeostasis by regulating the expression of Hamp
in the liver (Hou et al., 2012). It is known that the effect of E2 on
cellular iron homeostasis increases the absorption of iron by cells,
thereby increasing the absorption of iron by up-regulating the
expression of Tfrc in cells (Dai et al., 2008). In addition, it has been
proposed that increased estrogen levels can up-regulate the iron
export gene Slc40a1 (Stuckey et al., 2006). E2 exposure can also
increase the expression of Slc40a1 and Tfrc in MCF-7 cells, thus
increasing the intracellular iron content (Bajbouj et al., 2017).

In this experiment, the high-dose group E2 level decreased,
while Tfrc, Slc40a1, and Hamp were down-regulated. The iron
content in the placenta supernatant of group D increased (Fig. 1c).
We speculate that high-dose TEB can reduce the level of E2 in the
placenta through Cyp1a1 and Essra, and the reduced E2 level will
inhibit the expression of Tfrc gene, thereby reducing the iron input
of trophoblast cells in the placenta, thereby reducing the iron
content in the placenta. In order to maintain iron reserves in tro-
phoblasts, feedback reduces the expression of the only iron export
regulator Slc40a1 gene to offset the decrease in iron reserves in
trophoblasts due to the reduced iron input by Tfrc. Therefore, this
iron regulation mechanism increases the concentration of ferrous
iron in the placental tissue supernatant of group D, which is called
intracellular iron deficiency. In short, high-dose exposure to TEB
can reduce iron input and increase the production of placental
trophoblasts, reduce the iron reserves in trophoblasts, and increase
the iron in the placental tissue supernatant.

The increase in iron in the placental supernatant can allow more
iron to enter the fetal circulation through endothelial cells, and
reduce the impact of iron homeostasis on the fetus (Fisher and
Nemeth, 2017). In addition, iron deficiency in trophoblasts in-
creases hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a), thereby inducing the
response of ROS to intracellular Fe2+ and programmed hypertrophy
(Eckard et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2020). Despite these self-defense
reactions, the fetus eventually develops into a low birth weight
baby and is ultimately affected by prenatal TEB exposure.

The limitation of the current study is that TEB exposure dose in
this study may be higher than the actual environmental exposure
dose. TEB can be detected in farm workers and the highest level of
TEB was 2.22 ng/kg in hair samples (Schummer et al., 2012). The

<!-- PageNumber="13" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Chemosphere 264 (2021) 128432" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Y. Ying, P. Pan, C. Zou et al." -->

exposure period is from the 12th day to the 21st day of pregnancy.
This short-term and high-dose exposure is very different from the
real environmental scenario. Whether TEB can induce placental
toxicity in humans requires further epidemiological studies.

In conclusion, as a key environmental endocrine disruptor, TEB
severely disrupts the structure and function of the rat placenta,
leading to placental hypertrophy, fetal LBW, and feminization of
male fetuses. These results are caused by the superposition of many
factors of polygenic changes. We speculate that TEB mainly directly
inhibits aromatase activity and up-regulates CYP1A1, thus leading
to lower level of placental E2. This partially causes iron deficiency in
placental trophoblast cells by reducing the two key factors of
placental iron homeostasis, HAMP and TFRC. In addition, TEB in-
terferes with placental aquaporins and calcium homeostasis. These
unfavorable factors have seriously damaged the internal environ-
ment of fetal growth and development.


## Author contributions

Y.F.Y. and R.S.G. designed the study, Y.F.Y. performed the ex-
periments, P.P.P. and Y.Y.W. collected and organized data, C.Z. and
Y.L. did the initial data statistics, Y.B.T. and X.H.H. fed animals, Q.X.
and L.B.L. did the pathological analysis of sections, J.Q.L. partici-
pated in design and manuscript retouching, R.S.G. analyzed the
data and wrote the manuscript.


## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing
financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


## Acknowledgments

This work was supported by Department of Health of Zhejiang
Province (11-CX29 to RSG). The RNA-seq was provided by Kang-
Chen Bio-tech, Shanghai, China.


## Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.128432.


## References

Akirav, C., Lu, Y., Mu, J., Qu, D.W., Zhou, Y.Q., Slevin, J., Holmyard, D., Foster, F.S.,
Adamson, S.L., 2005. Ultrasonic detection and developmental changes in
calcification of the placenta during normal pregnancy in mice. Placenta 26,
129-137.

Bajbouj, K., Shafarin, J., Abdalla, M.Y., Ahmad, I.M., Hamad, M., 2017. Estrogen-
induced disruption of intracellular iron metabolism leads to oxidative stress,
membrane damage, and cell cycle arrest in MCF-7 cells. Tumour biology : the
journal of the International Society for Oncodevelopmental Biology and Med-
icine 39, 1010428317726184.

Barker, D.J., Thornburg, K.L., 2013. Placental programming of chronic diseases,
cancer and lifespan: a review. Placenta 34, 841-845.

Belkacemi, L., Beall, M.H., Magee, T.R., Pourtemour, M., Ross, M.G., 2008. AQP1 gene
expression is upregulated by arginine vasopressin and cyclic AMP agonists in
trophoblast cells. Life Sci. 82, 1272-1280.

Briana, D.D., Boutsikou, T., Baka, S., Boutsikou, M., Stamati, L., Hassiakos, D.,
Gourgiotis, D., Malamitsi-Puchner, A., 2013. Perinatal role of hepcidin and iron
homeostasis in full-term intrauterine growth-restricted infants. Eur. J. Hae-
matol. 90, 37-44.

Cao, C., Fleming, M.D., 2016. The placenta: the forgotten essential organ of iron
transport. Nutr. Rev. 74, 421-431.

Chen, X., Zhu, Q., Li, X., Huang, T., Wang, S., Wang, Y., Chen, X., Lin, Z., Ge, R.S., 2019a.
276.Pubertal exposure to tebuconazole increases testosterone production via
inhibiting testicular aromatase activity in rats. Chemosphere 230, 519-526.

Chen, X., Zhu, Q., Li, X., Huang, T., Wang, S., Wang, Y., Chen, X., Lin, Z., Ge, R.S., 2019b.
Pubertal exposure to tebuconazole increases testosterone production via
inhibiting testicular aromatase activity in rats. Chemosphere 230, 519-526.

Cui, N., Xu, H., Yao, S., He, Y., Zhang, H., Yu, Y., 2018. Chiral triazole fungicide
tebuconazole: enantioselective bioaccumulation, bioactivity, acute toxicity, and
dissipation in soils. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 25, 25468-25475.

Dai, J., Jian, J., Bosland, M., Frenkel, K., Bernhardt, G., Huang, X., 2008. Roles of
hormone replacement therapy and iron in proliferation of breast epithelial cells
with different estrogen and progesterone receptor status. Breast 17, 172-179.

Eckard, J., Dai, J., Wu, J., Jian, J., Yang, Q,, Chen, H., Costa, M., Frenkel, K., Huang, X.,
2010. Effects of cellular iron deficiency on the formation of vascular endothelial
growth factor and angiogenesis. Iron deficiency and angiogenesis. Canc. Cell Int.
10, 28-28.

Fenner, K., Canonica, S., Wackett, L.P., Elsner, M., 2013. Evaluating pesticide degra-
dation in the environment: blind spots and emerging opportunities. Science
(New York, N.Y.) 341, 752-758.

Fisher, A.L., Nemeth, E., 2017. Iron homeostasis during pregnancy. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
106, 1567S-1574S.

Fitzsimmons, E.D., Bajaj, T., 2020. Embryology, Amniotic Fluid. StatPearls. StatPearls
Publishing. StatPearls Publishing LLC., Treasure Island (FL).

Frank, K., Kranias, E.G., 2000. Phospholamban and cardiac contractility. Ann. Med.
32, 572-578.

Furukawa, S., Hayashi, S., Usuda, K., Abe, M., Ogawa, I., 2008. Histopathological
effect of ketoconazole on rat placenta. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 70, 1179-1184.

Ganz, T., 2006. Hepcidin and its role in regulating systemic iron metabolism. He-
matology. American Society of Hematology. Education Program 29-35, 507.
Giguère, V., 2002. To ERR in the estrogen pathway. Trends Endocrinol. Metabol .:
TEM (Trends Endocrinol. Metab.) 13, 220-225.

Gomez-Gutierrez, A.M., Parra-Sosa, B.E., Bueno-Sanchez, J.C., 2019. Glycosylation
profile of the transferrin receptor in gestational iron deficiency and early-onset
severe preeclampsia. Journal of pregnancy 9514546, 2019.

Guo, Y., Zhang, N., Zhang, D., Ren, Q., Ganz, T., Liu, S., Nemeth, E., 2019. Iron ho-
meostasis in pregnancy and spontaneous abortion. Am. J. Hematol. 94, 184-188.

Herr, F., Horndasch, M., Howe, D., Baal, N., Goyal, P., Fischer, S., Zygmunt, M.,
Preissner, K.T., 2014. Human placenta-derived Wnt-5a induces the expression of
ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 in CD133(+)CD34(+)-hematopoietic progenitor cells.
Reprod. Biol. 14, 262-275.

Hou, Y., Zhang, S., Wang, L., Li, J., Qu, G., He, J., Rong, H., Ji, H., Liu, S., 2012. Estrogen
regulates iron homeostasis through governing hepatic hepcidin expression via
an estrogen response element. Gene 511, 398-403.

Jacobsen, P.R., Christiansen, S., Boberg, J., Nellemann, C., Hass, U., 2010. Combined
exposure to endocrine disrupting pesticides impairs parturition, causes pup
mortality and affects sexual differentiation in rats. Int. J. Androl. 33, 434-442.
Krombeen, S.K., Shankar, V., Noorai, R.E., Saski, C.A., Sharp, J.L., Wilson, M.E.,
Wilmoth, T.A., 2019. The identification of differentially expressed genes be-
tween extremes of placental efficiency in maternal line gilts on day 95 of
gestation. BMC Genom. 20, 254.

Kwan, S.T.C., King, J.H., Yan, J., Wang, Z., Jiang, X., Hutzler, J.S., Klein, H.R., Brenna, J.T.,
Roberson, M.S., Caudill, M.A., 2017. Maternal choline supplementation modu-
lates placental nutrient transport and metabolism in late gestation of mouse
pregnancy. J. Nutr. 147, 2083-2092.

Li, S., Wu, Q., Sun, Q., Coffin, S., Gui, W., Zhu, G., 2019. Parental exposure to tebu-
conazole causes thyroid endocrine disruption in zebrafish and developmental
toxicity in offspring. Aquat. Toxicol. 211, 116-123.

Lv, X., Pan, L., Wang, J., Lu, L., Yan, W., Zhu, Y., Xu, Y., Guo, M., Zhuang, S., 2017. Effects
of triazole fungicides on androgenic disruption and CYP3A4 enzyme activity.
Environ. Pollut. 222, 504-512.

Maltepe, E., Fisher, S.J., 2015. Placenta: the forgotten organ. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.
31, 523-552.

Mando, C., Tabano, S., Colapietro, P., Pileri, P., Colleoni, F., Avagliano, L., Doi, P.,
Bulfamante, G., Miozzo, M., Cetin, I., 2011. Transferrin receptor gene and protein
expression and localization in human IUGR and normal term placentas.
Placenta 32, 44-50.

Mastrolia, S.A., Weintraub, A.Y., Sciaky-Tamir, Y., Tirosh, D., Loverro, G.,
Hershkovitz, R., 2016. Placental calcifications: a clue for the identification of
high-risk fetuses in the low-risk pregnant population? J. Matern. Fetal Neonatal
Med .: the official journal of the European Association of Perinatal Medicine, the
Federation of Asia and Oceania Perinatal Societies, the International Society of
Perinatal Obstet 29, 921-927.

Mostafalou, S., Abdollahi, M., 2017. Pesticides: an update of human exposure and
toxicity. Arch. Toxicol. 91, 549-599.

Nemeth, E., Tuttle, M.S., Powelson, J., Vaughn, M.B., Donovan, A., Ward, D.M.,
Ganz, T., Kaplan, J., 2004. Hepcidin regulates cellular iron efflux by binding to
ferroportin and inducing its internalization. Science (New York, N.Y.) 306,
2090-2093.

Norman, N.A., Bruce, N.W., 1979. Fetal and placental weight relationships in the
albino rat near term. Teratology 19, 245-250.

Rey Moreno, M.C., Fussell, K.C., Groters, S., Schneider, S., Strauss, V., Stinchcombe, S.,
Fegert, I., Veras, M., van Ravenzwaay, B., 2013. Epoxiconazole-induced degen-
eration in rat placenta and the effects of estradiol supplementation. Birth De-
fects Res. Part B Dev. Reproductive Toxicol. 98, 208-221.

Sapin, V., Dolle, P., Hindelang, C., Kastner, P., Chambon, P., 1997. Defects of the
chorioallantoic placenta in mouse RXRalpha null fetuses. Dev. Biol. 191, 29-41.
Schummer, C., Salquebre, G., Briand, O., Millet, M., Appenzeller, B.M., 2012. Deter-
mination of farm workers' exposure to pesticides by hair analysis. Toxicol. Lett.
210, 203-210.

Segawa, H., Shiozaki, Y., Kaneko, I., Miyamoto, K., 2015. The role of sodium-
dependent phosphate transporter in phosphate homeostasis. J. Nutr. Sci.

<!-- PageNumber="14" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Y. Ying, P. Pan, C. Zou et al." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Chemosphere 264 (2021) 128432" -->

Vitaminol. 61 (Suppl. I), S119-S121.

Staud, F., Karahoda, R., 2018. Trophoblast: the central unit of fetal growth, protec-
tion and programming. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 105, 35-40.

Strickland, T.C., Potter, T.L., Joo, H., 2004. Tebuconazole dissipation and metabolism
in Tifton loamy sand during laboratory incubationt. Pest Manag. Sci. 60,
703-709.

Stuckey, R., Aldridge, T., Lim, F.L., Moore, D.J., Tinwell, H., Doherty, N., Davies, R.,
Smith, A.G., Kimber, I., Ashby, J., Orphanides, G., Moggs, J.G., 2006. Induction of
iron homeostasis genes during estrogen-induced uterine growth and differ-
entiation. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 253, 22-29.

Sun, M.Y., Habeck, J.M., Meyer, K.M., Koch, J.M., Ramadoss, J., Blohowiak, S.E.,
Magness, R.R., Kling, P.J., 2013. Ovine uterine space restriction alters placental
transferrin receptor and fetal iron status during late pregnancy. Pediatr. Res. 73,
277-285.

Taxvig, C., Hass, U., Axelstad, M., Dalgaard, M., Boberg, J., Andeasen, H.R.,
Vinggaard, A.M., 2007. Endocrine-disrupting activities in vivo of the fungicides
tebuconazole and epoxiconazole. Toxicol. Sci. : an official journal of the Society
of Toxicology 100, 464-473.

Tsuchiya, Y., Nakajima, M., Yokoi, T., 2005. Cytochrome P450-mediated metabolism
of estrogens and its regulation in human. Canc. Lett. 227, 115-124.

Wallingford, M.C., Gammill, H.S., Giachelli, C.M., 2016. Slc20a2 deficiency results in
fetal growth restriction and placental calcification associated with thickened

basement membranes and novel CD13 and lamininalpha1 expressing cells.
Reprod. Biol. 16, 13-26.

Wang, Y., Xie, L., Tian, E., Li, X., Wen, Z., Li, L., Chen, L., Zhong, Y., Ge, R.S., 2019.
Oncostatin M inhibits differentiation of rat stem Leydig cells in vivo and in vitro.
J. Cell Mol. Med. 23, 426-438.

Xu, H., Zhang, X., Ye, Y., Li, X., 2019. Bisphenol A affects estradiol metabolism by
targeting CYP1A1 and CYP19A1 in human placental JEG-3 cells. Toxicol. Vitro 61,
104615-104615.

Xu, X., Li, X., Sun, H., Cao, Z., Gao, R., Niu, T., Wang, Y., Ma, T., Chen, R., Wang, C.,
Yang, Z., Liu, J.Y., 2020. Murine placental-fetal phosphate dyshomeostasis
caused by an Xpr1 deficiency accelerates placental calcification and restricts
fetal growth in late gestation. J. Bone Miner. Res. : the official journal of the
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 35, 116-129.

Zhang, Q., Hua, X., Yang, Y., Yin, W., Tian, M., Shi, H., Wang, M., 2015a. Stereo-
selective degradation of flutriafol and tebuconazole in grape. Environ. Sci.
Pollut. Res. Int. 22, 4350-4358.

Zhang, S., Regnault, T.R., Barker, P.L., Botting, K.J., McMillen, I.C., McMillan, C.M.,
Roberts, C.T., Morrison, J.L., 2015b. Placental adaptations in growth restriction.
Nutrients 7, 360-389.

Zhang, H., He, Y., Wang, J .- X., Chen, M .- H., Xu, J .- J., Jiang, M .- H., Feng, Y .- L., Gu, Y .- F.,
2020. miR-30-5p-mediated ferroptosis of trophoblasts is implicated in the
pathogenesis of preeclampsia. Redox Biol 29, 101402-101402.

<!-- PageNumber="15" -->
