<!-- image -->

## Full length article

## Urinary biomonitoring of glyphosate exposure among male farmers and nonfarmers in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture (BEEA) study

Vicky C. Chang a,* , Maria Ospina b , Shuai Xie a , Gabriella Andreotti a , Christine G. Parks c , Danping Liu d , Jessica M. Madrigal a , Mary H. Ward a , Nathaniel Rothman a , Debra T. Silverman a , Dale P. Sandler c , Melissa C. Friesen a , Laura E. Beane Freeman a , Antonia M. Calafat b , Jonathan N. Hofmann a

a Occupational and Environmental Epidemiology Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA

- b Division of Laboratory Sciences, National Center for Environmental Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA
- c Epidemiology Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Durham, NC, USA

d Biostatistics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA

## A R T I C L E  I N F O

Handling Editor: Adrian Covaci

Keywords: Glyphosate Farmers Occupational exposure Human biomonitoring Urine

## A B S T R A C T

Glyphosate  is  the  most  widely  applied  herbicide  worldwide.  Glyphosate  biomonitoring  data  are  limited  for agricultural settings. We measured urinary glyphosate concentrations and assessed exposure determinants in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture (BEEA) study. We selected four groups of BEEA participants based on self-reported pesticide exposure: recently exposed farmers with occupational glyphosate use in the last 7 days (n = 98), farmers with high lifetime glyphosate use ( &gt; 80th percentile) but no use in the last 7 days (n = 70),  farming  controls  with  minimal  lifetime  use  (n = 100),  and  nonfarming  controls  with  no  occupational pesticide exposures and no recent home/garden glyphosate use (n = 100). Glyphosate was quantified in first morning void urine using ion chromatography isotope-dilution tandem mass spectrometry. We estimated associations  between  urinary  glyphosate  concentrations  and  potential  determinants  using  multivariable  linear regression. Glyphosate was detected ( ≥ 0.2 µ g/L) in urine of most farmers with recent (91 %) and high lifetime (93 %) use, as well as farming (88 %) and nonfarming (81 %) controls; geometric mean concentrations were 0.89, 0.59, 0.46, and 0.39 µ g/L (0.79, 0.51, 0.42, and 0.37 µ g/g creatinine), respectively. Compared with both control groups, urinary glyphosate concentrations were significantly elevated among recently exposed farmers (P &lt; 0.0001), particularly those who used glyphosate in the previous day [vs. nonfarming controls; geometric mean ratio  (GMR) = 5.46;  95  %  confidence  interval  (CI):  3.75,  7.93].  Concentrations  among  high  lifetime exposed  farmers  were  also  elevated  (P &lt; 0.01  vs.  nonfarming  controls).  Among  recently  exposed  farmers, glyphosate concentrations were higher among those not wearing gloves when applying glyphosate (GMR = 1.91; 95 % CI: 1.17, 3.11), not wearing long-sleeved shirts when mixing/loading glyphosate (GMR = 2.00; 95 % CI: 1.04, 3.86), applying glyphosate exclusively using broadcast/boom sprayers (vs. hand sprayer only; GMR = 1.70; 95 % CI: 1.00, 2.92), and applying glyphosate to crops (vs. non-crop; GMR = 1.72; 95 % CI: 1.04, 2.84). Both farmers  and  nonfarmers  are  exposed  to  glyphosate,  with  recency  of  occupational  glyphosate  use  being  the strongest determinant of urinary glyphosate concentrations. Continued biomonitoring of glyphosate in various settings is warranted.

Abbreviations: AHS, Agricultural Health Study; AMPA, aminomethylphosphonic acid; BEEA, Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture; BMI, body mass index; CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; CI, confidence interval; GM, geometric mean; GMR, geometric mean ratio; LOD, limit of detection; NHANES, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey; PPE, personal protective equipment; QC, quality control.

* Corresponding author at: Occupational and Environmental Epidemiology Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 9609 Medical Center Dr., Room 6E640, MSC 9771, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

E-mail address: chidan.chang@nih.gov (V.C. Chang).

## https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2024.108644

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Environment International

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/envint

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

V.C. Chang et al.

## 1. Introduction

Glyphosate,  the  active  ingredient  of  a  broad-spectrum  herbicide formulation commercialized in 1974, is widely used to control weeds in agricultural and other settings (Benbrook, 2016). Following the introduction of genetically engineered glyphosate-resistant crops in 1996, glyphosate use rose sharply, and it has since become the most heavily applied agricultural pesticide in the United States and globally (Benbrook,  2016).  Glyphosate  is  also  the  second  most  commonly  used pesticide in the U.S. home and garden sector (Atwood and Paisley-Jones, 2017). Given its broad application, glyphosate and its potential health effects,  including  cancer,  have  received  increasing  public  health  and scientific attention (Myers et al., 2016); however, evidence regarding glyphosate  toxicity  and  carcinogenicity  remains  inconclusive  and controversial (Mesnage and Antoniou, 2017; Kogevinas, 2019). Notably, the International Agency for Research on Cancer classified glyphosate as a  probable  (group  2A)  human  carcinogen  in  2015,  based  in  part  on limited  epidemiologic  evidence  of  an  association  with  non-Hodgkin lymphoma (Guyton et al., 2015), whereas the U.S. Environmental Protection  Agency and several other regulatory agencies concluded that glyphosate is unlikely to be carcinogenic to humans (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 2017; Portier et al., 2016).

Glyphosate  can  enter  the  human  body  through  dermal  contact, inhalation, and oral ingestion of contaminated foods and water (Agency for  Toxic  Substances  and  Disease  Registry  (ATSDR),  2020).  Among occupationally exposed individuals directly involved in handling pesticides,  including  agricultural  workers,  research  suggests  that  dermal absorption  is  the  predominant  route  of  exposure  (Agency  for  Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), 2020; Connolly et al., 2019). Although  there  is  limited  knowledge  regarding  the  toxicokinetics  of glyphosate in humans, current data suggest that glyphosate does not undergo significant metabolism upon absorption and is mainly excreted as the unchanged parent compound in urine (Connolly et al., 2019), with an elimination half-life of approximately 5 -10 h (Connolly et al., 2019; Zoller et al., 2020; Kohsuwan et al., 2022). As such, quantification of glyphosate concentrations in urine represents a noninvasive method of assessing the internal dose of recent exposure to glyphosate.

Despite  widespread  use  of  glyphosate  and  ongoing  debate  surrounding  its  potential  impacts  on  human  health,  there  is  a  relative paucity of biomonitoring data on glyphosate exposure in both occupational and non-occupational settings (Gillezeau et al., 2019; Gillezeau et al., 2020; Connolly et al., 2020; Connolly and Koch, 2023; Mu ˜ noz et al., 2023; Ospina et al., 2022). This may be partly due to analytical challenges associated with laboratory measurements of glyphosate, a highly  polar  compound  with  metal-chelating  properties  (Valle  et  al., 2019). In a review that was further updated in 2020, Gillezeau et al. (Gillezeau et al., 2019; Gillezeau et al., 2020) identified a total of 24 studies measuring glyphosate concentrations in human  biofluids (mainly urine), of which only 11 studies focused on occupational exposures,  including  eight  assessing  urinary  glyphosate  among  farmers (Acquavella  et  al.,  2004;  Curwin  et  al.,  2007;  Mesnage  et  al.,  2012; Jayasumana et al., 2015; Rend ´ on-von Osten and Dzul-Caamal, 2017; Wongta et al.,  2018;  Perry  et  al.,  2019;  Balderrama-Carmona  et  al., 2020).  However,  many  of  the  prior  investigations  among  farmers, including  additional  studies  published  after  the  review  (Bootsikeaw et al., 2021; Connolly et al., 2022; Campbell et al., 2022; Mueller et al., 2024), were limited by the small number of participants (mostly n &lt; 50 farmers), unavailability of data on glyphosate usage and other factors potentially influencing exposure, lack of adjustment for urinary dilution, and/or  absence  of  a  nonfarming  comparison  group.  Furthermore, different methods were employed to quantify urinary glyphosate across studies, with variable detection limits and generally low frequencies of detection, especially among individuals who may not have been exposed within a short time period prior to urine sampling (Gillezeau et al., 2019; Gillezeau et al., 2020; Connolly et al., 2020).

In  2021,  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC)

published an ion chromatography -mass spectrometry approach suitable for  quantifying  urinary  glyphosate  concentrations  across  various  settings, including investigations of background exposures (Schütze et al., 2021). Applying this method to urine samples from 2,310 participants in the  2013 -2014  National  Health  and  Nutrition  Examination  Survey (NHANES), urinary glyphosate concentrations were assessed at the national  level  for  the  first  time  in  the  United  States,  with  81  %  of  the population ≥ 6 years of age found to have detectable concentrations (Ospina et al., 2022). However, no information on occupational use of glyphosate was available in this general population study.

Utilizing the recently developed CDC approach to quantify urinary glyphosate, we investigated the extent of glyphosate exposure and its potential  determinants  in  a  well-characterized  population  of  male farmers, as well as a group of demographically similar nonfarmers, in the  Biomarkers  of  Exposure  and  Effect  in  Agriculture  (BEEA)  study. Specifically, we evaluated reported use of glyphosate, including recency of  use  and  application  practices,  in  relation  to  urinary  glyphosate concentrations.

## 2. Materials and methods

## 2.1. Study design and population

The  BEEA  study  is  a  molecular  epidemiologic  subcohort  of  the Agricultural Health Study (AHS), a large prospective cohort of pesticide applicators in Iowa and North Carolina (Alavanja et al., 1996). Details of the  BEEA  study  design  and  data  collection  procedures  have  been described elsewhere (Hofmann et al., 2015). Briefly, male farmers in the AHS were eligible for participating in BEEA if they were ≥ 50 years of age, still resided in Iowa or North Carolina, completed the AHS enrollment (1993 -1997) and follow-up [Phase 2 (1999 -2003) and Phase 3 (2005 -2010)] questionnaires, and had never been diagnosed with cancer  other  than  nonmelanoma  skin  cancer.  A  total  of  1,681  eligible farmers  from  the  AHS  were  enrolled  between  2010  and  2017.  As  a nonfarming comparison group, BEEA additionally enrolled 211 males from Iowa and North Carolina who were ≥ 50 years of age, had no history of cancer, and had not lived or worked on a farm or held a job that involved mixing, loading, or applying pesticides in the last 10 years or for &gt; 12 months since 18 years of age. The nonfarmers were identified using voter registration lists and recruited from 20 counties (10 from each state) located outside major metropolitan areas from which many of the participating BEEA farmers were recruited (Chang et al., 2023). The BEEA study protocol was approved by institutional review boards at the National Cancer Institute and other participating institutions. All participants provided written informed consent. The involvement of the CDC  laboratory  did  not  constitute  engagement  in  human  subjects research.

## 2.2. Assessment of glyphosate use and selection of study groups

Occupational use of glyphosate was assessed based on self-report from the AHS and BEEA questionnaires. At AHS enrollment, farmers reported whether they had ever personally mixed or applied specific pesticides, including glyphosate, and if so, the frequency and duration of use and application practices; this information was further updated from follow-up  interviews  in  1999 -2003  and  2005 -2010.  At  the  BEEA enrollment interview (2010 -2018) that took place during the home visit for  biospecimen  collection,  farmers  provided  information  on  specific pesticides used on crops or animals (or for any other farming-related activities) in the last 12 months, including details on the most recent dates  of  use,  frequency  of  use,  application  method  and  type,  and whether they normally used gloves or other personal protective equipment (PPE) while mixing/loading or applying each pesticide. The BEEA questionnaire also collected information on home and garden pesticide use in the last 12 months from both farmers and nonfarmers. To estimate cumulative lifetime occupational use of glyphosate among farmers, two

V.C. Chang et al.

metrics were created by combining responses across questionnaires: a ) lifetime days of use (number of days of use per year × number of years used);  and b )  intensity-weighted  lifetime  days  of  use,  calculated  by multiplying lifetime days of use by an exposure intensity score that accounts for factors known to influence exposure, such as mixing/loading of pesticides, application method, and PPE use (Coble et al., 2011).

In the current investigation, we selected four groups of participants (total n = 368) with respect to their use of glyphosate (Chang et al., 2023). First, a group of recently exposed farmers (n = 98) included those with occupational glyphosate use within 7 days before urine collection. Second, high lifetime exposed farmers (n = 70) included those who had no occupational glyphosate use in the last 7 days but whose lifetime use was in the top quintile among all BEEA farmers for both lifetime days ( ≥ 197) and intensity-weighted lifetime days ( ≥ 11,334). Third, as a minimally exposed farming control group (n = 100), we selected farmers who had never used glyphosate occupationally during their lifetime or had not used glyphosate since after the first AHS follow-up interview (1999 -2003)  and  were  in  the  lowest  tertiles  of  both  lifetime  days ( &lt; 14.5) and intensity-weighted lifetime days ( &lt; 677) of use among all BEEA farmers. Finally, a nonfarming control group (n = 100) was selected from nonfarmers who reported no home or garden use of glyphosate during the 7 days prior to urine collection. Participants from each of the two control groups (farming and nonfarming controls) were selected such that they were frequency matched to the exposed groups (recently exposed and high lifetime exposed combined) on age (50 -60, 61 -70, and &gt; 70  years),  state  of  residence  (Iowa  and  North  Carolina),  and season of interview/urine collection (April -September and October -March).

## 2.3. Urinary glyphosate measurements

Each participant provided a first morning void urine sample on the day of the BEEA enrollment interview (2010 -2018). Participants were asked to store the samples in the refrigerator before the arrival of the study staff. Samples were shipped on ice to a central processing laboratory, where they were aliquoted and transferred for long-term storage at -80 ℃ until shipment for analysis.

Urinary  glyphosate  concentrations  were  quantified  at  the  CDC ' s National Center for Environmental Health (Atlanta, GA, USA) using an ion chromatography isotope dilution tandem mass spectrometry method described previously (Ospina et al., 2022; Schütze et al., 2021). Briefly, an internal standard of isotope-labeled ( 15 N, 2 -13 C) glyphosate (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Andover, MA, USA) and ultrapure water were added to each urine sample. Glyphosate was extracted and separated  from  other  matrix  components  using  a  Dionex  ICS-5000 + ion chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA)  equipped  with  a  dual-column  and  switching  valve  assembly. Quantitation  by isotope  dilution-tandem  mass  spectrometry  was performed  with  an  AB  Sciex  5500  triple  quadrupole  mass  spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) equipped with a TurboIonSpray ® source.  Samples  from  each  of  the  four  study  groups  were distributed evenly across all batches. The limit of detection (LOD) was 0.2 µ g/L. Consistent with the NHANES analyses (Ospina et al., 2022; National Center for Environmental Health, 2022), concentrations below the LOD [n = 45 (12 %) of all 368 samples] were assigned a value of LOD/ √ 2,  which  has  been  recommended  for  lognormally  distributed data  that  are  not  highly  skewed  (geometric  standard  deviation &lt; 3) (Hornung and Reed, 1990). To assess measurement reproducibility, we included 68 blinded quality control (QC) samples from 34 participants (selected from all four study groups), with duplicate urine samples from each participant distributed either within or across batches. The withinbatch, between-batch, and overall coefficients of variation were 2.9 %, 5.3 %, and 6.0 %, respectively, and the intraclass correlation coefficient was 0.997. We also analyzed pooled QC samples across batches, and no evidence of laboratory drift was observed. In addition, to adjust glyphosate  concentrations  for  urinary  dilution,  urinary  creatinine  was measured using an enzymatic method at the University of Minnesota Advanced Research and Diagnostic Laboratory (Minneapolis, MN, USA).

## 2.4. Statistical analysis

We summarized participant characteristics among each of the four study groups using means and standard deviations for continuous variables and frequencies and proportions for categorical variables. Differences across study groups were assessed using analysis of variance for continuous variables and chi-squared or Fisher ' s  exact  tests  for  categorical variables. Urinary glyphosate concentrations were presented as both unadjusted ( µ g/L) and creatinine-corrected ( µ g/g creatinine) concentrations, summarized using percentiles and geometric means (GMs) with  corresponding  95  %  confidence  intervals  (CIs),  and  visualized using bar graphs and box-and-whisker plots. Differences in GM glyphosate concentrations between study groups were assessed by pairwise comparisons of means of natural log (ln)-transformed concentrations using linear regression. Within each study group, we further computed GM glyphosate concentrations across categories of participant characteristics [age, state, season of urine collection, time of urine collection, body mass index (BMI), and home/garden glyphosate use in the last 12 months]  and  used  analysis  of  variance  to  assess  differences.  Among nonfarming controls with home/garden glyphosate use, we also examined glyphosate concentrations according to number of days since last use.

Our main analyses evaluated urinary glyphosate concentrations in relation to recent (last 7 days) occupational glyphosate use and related characteristics, including days since last use ( ≤ 1, 2 -4, 5 -7 days before urine  collection),  use  of  gloves  and/or  other  PPE  (e.g.,  long-sleeved shirt,  goggles,  rubber  boots,  respirators)  while  mixing/loading  or applying glyphosate, application method (hand spray only, broadcast/ boom  spray  only,  both),  and  application  type  [non-crop  only  (e.g., around buildings, driveways, and fence rows), crops only, both]. For glove and/or other PPE use, we created a composite variable (gloves only, other PPE only, both, neither); we also separately examined use (yes vs. no) of gloves and other specific PPE worn by ≥ 5 farmers. We performed  linear  regression  analyses  with  ln-transformed  urinary glyphosate concentrations (unadjusted for creatinine) as the dependent variable and each glyphosate use-related characteristic as the independent  variable.  Comparisons  were  made  separately  with  either  the farming or nonfarming controls as the referent category [e.g., farming or nonfarming  controls  (referent),  recently  exposed  farmers  who  used gloves, recently exposed farmers who did not use gloves] such that when one  of  the  control  groups  was  designated  as  the  referent,  the  other control group was excluded from the analysis; the high lifetime exposed group (i.e., no occupational use in the last 7 days) was not included in these  analyses.  We  reported  associations  as  geometric  mean  ratios (GMRs), which were calculated by exponentiating the regression coefficients  and  interpreted  as  the  ratio  of  the  GM  urinary  glyphosate concentrations  comparing  subsets  of  recently  exposed  farmers  (e.g., with  or  without  glove  use)  to  participants  in  the  respective  control groups. We also performed analyses restricted to the recently exposed group [e.g., glove use (referent), no glove use]. All models adjusted for age (continuous, years), age squared, urinary creatinine concentration (ln-transformed;  continuous),  state  (Iowa,  North  Carolina),  season  of urine  collection  (April -September,  October -March),  time  of  urine collection (before 4:00 a.m., 4:00 -5:59 a.m., 6:00 a.m. or later), and BMI (continuous,  kg/m 2 ).  For  analyses  restricted  to  the  recently  exposed group, we also included a model that additionally adjusted for days since last  use  of  glyphosate,  the  strongest  predictor  of  urinary  glyphosate concentrations.

To  examine  exposure  associated  with  longer-term  occupational glyphosate use, we also evaluated past-year use (tertiles of number of days or intensity-weighted days in the last 12 months) and cumulative lifetime use (tertiles of lifetime days or intensity-weighted lifetime days) in  relation  to  urinary  glyphosate  concentrations  among  the  recently

V.C. Chang et al.

exposed and high lifetime exposed groups (separate or combined) using multivariable linear regression as described above.

All statistical analyses were performed using SAS, version 9.4 (SAS Institute  Inc.,  Cary,  NC,  USA).  Tests  were  two-sided,  with  statistical significance evaluated at P &lt; 0.05.

## 3. Results

Selected demographic and other participant characteristics by study group  are  shown  in  Table  1.  The  vast  majority  of  participants  were White (98 %), residents of Iowa (76 %), and with overweight or obesity (83 %). Distributions of most characteristics were similar across the four study groups, except, as expected, recently exposed farmers were more likely to have their urine collected during April -September (i.e., in the growing season) than other groups. Approximately 40 % of all participants used glyphosate in the home or garden in the last 12 months, with no differences observed by study group (P = 0.83).

Glyphosate was detected (LOD = 0.2 µ g/L) in the urine of &gt; 80 % of participants across all study groups, with detection frequencies ranging from 81 % among nonfarming controls to 93 % among high lifetime exposed farmers (Table 2). We observed a clear pattern of differences in urinary glyphosate concentrations across the four study groups defined by glyphosate use, with GMs of 0.89 µ g/L (0.79 µ g/g creatinine), 0.59 µ g/L (0.51 µ g/g creatinine), 0.46 µ g/L (0.42 µ g/g creatinine), and 0.39 µ g/L (0.37 µ g/g creatinine) among recently exposed farmers, high lifetime  exposed  farmers,  farming  controls,  and  nonfarming  controls, respectively (Table 2, Supplementary Figure S1, and Fig. 1). In pairwise comparisons, we observed statistically significantly elevated GM concentrations in  recently  exposed  farmers  relative  to  each  of  the  other three groups (for creatinine-corrected concentrations: P &lt; 0.0001 vs. each control group and P = 0.0002 vs. high lifetime exposed farmers), and in high lifetime exposed farmers relative to nonfarming controls (P = 0.009). The upper percentile concentrations were also considerably higher  for  recently  exposed  farmers  (e.g.,  75th,  90th,  and  95th percentiles: 1.52, 3.05, and 7.72 µ g/g creatinine, respectively, compared with  0.55,  0.92,  and  1.08 µ g/g  creatinine  for  nonfarming  controls; Table 2 and Supplementary Figures S2 and S3).

Urinary glyphosate concentrations across participant characteristics are presented by study group in Supplementary Table S1. In general, glyphosate concentrations increased slightly with age, especially among recently exposed farmers and nonfarming controls, and levelled off at older ages for both unadjusted and creatinine-corrected concentrations among recently exposed farmers. We also observed statistically significant differences according to time of urine collection among recently exposed farmers, with higher concentrations for samples collected at 6 a. m. or  later  compared  to  those  collected  before  6  a.m.,  although  the pattern  was  not  as  clear  for  creatinine-corrected  concentrations.  No notable differences were observed across other characteristics, including home/garden glyphosate use in the last 12 months. However, among a subset of nonfarmers with information on days since last home/garden use of glyphosate (n = 20), we observed marginally elevated concentrations in those with more recent use [GM (95 % CI) = 0.61 (0.34, 1.11) µ g/L for use in the last 30 days vs. 0.36 (0.23, 0.57) µ g/L for use &gt; 30 days ago, P = 0.15]; the difference was more pronounced after creatinine  correction  [GM = 0.54  (0.38,  0.77)  vs.  0.29  (0.21,  0.42) µ g/g creatinine, P = 0.04] (Supplementary Table S2).

Table  3  presents  urinary  glyphosate  concentrations  in  relation  to recent (last 7 days) occupational glyphosate use and related characteristics, including PPE use and application method and type. We observed statistically  significantly  elevated  glyphosate  concentrations  among farmers  who  reported  use  of  glyphosate  on  the  day  before  urine collection (GMR = 5.46; 95 % CI: 3.75, 7.93) and those with use 2 -4 days  before  urine  collection  (GMR = 1.86;  95  %  CI:  1.38,  2.51) compared to nonfarming controls. Similar associations were observed relative to farming controls. We also found a strong association among recently exposed farmers ( ≤ 1 vs. 5 -7 days since last use of glyphosate; GMR = 3.94; 95 % CI: 2.40, 6.46; Ptrend &lt; 0.0001). The majority (55 %) of recently exposed farmers wore gloves and/or other PPE when mixing

Table 1 Selected characteristics of glyphosate-exposed and control groups in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture study, 2010 -2018.

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 1 Selected characteristics of glyphosate-exposed and control groups in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture study, 2010 -2018.</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Characteristic a</th><th>Recently exposed (n = 98)</th><th>High lifetime exposed (n = 70)</th><th>Farming controls (n = 100)</th><th>Nonfarming controls (n = 100)</th><th>P-value b</th></tr><tr><th>Age (years)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Mean ± SD</th><td>63.2 ± 8.3</td><td>62.6 ± 9.4</td><td>64.4 ± 10.1</td><td>63.5 ± 8.7</td><td>0.62</td></tr><tr><th>50 - 59</th><td>35 (36)</td><td>31 (44)</td><td>34 (34)</td><td>40 (40)</td><td>0.85</td></tr><tr><th>60 - 69</th><td>37 (38)</td><td>24 (34)</td><td>39 (39)</td><td>33 (33)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>≥ 70</th><td>26 (27)</td><td>15 (21)</td><td>27 (27)</td><td>27 (27)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>State</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Iowa</th><td>77 (79)</td><td>49 (70)</td><td>76 (76)</td><td>76 (76)</td><td>0.64</td></tr><tr><th>North Carolina</th><td>21 (21)</td><td>21 (30)</td><td>24 (24)</td><td>24 (24)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Race</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>White</th><td>97 (99)</td><td>70 (100)</td><td>96 (96)</td><td>98 (98)</td><td>0.37</td></tr><tr><th>Other c</th><td>1 (1)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>4 (4)</td><td>2 (2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th colspan="2">Season of urine collection</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>April - September</th><td>92 (94)</td><td>29 (41)</td><td>71 (71)</td><td>63 (63)</td><td>&lt; 0.0001</td></tr><tr><th>October - March</th><td>6 (6)</td><td>41 (59)</td><td>29 (29)</td><td>37 (37)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th colspan="2">Time of urine collection</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Before 4:00 a.m.</th><td>22 (22)</td><td>8 (11)</td><td>14 (14)</td><td>16 (16)</td><td>0.61</td></tr><tr><th>4:00 - 5:59 a.m.</th><td>33 (34)</td><td>29 (41)</td><td>40 (40)</td><td>38 (38)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>6:00 a.m. or later</th><td>43 (44)</td><td>33 (47)</td><td>46 (46)</td><td>46 (46)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th colspan="2">Body mass index (kg/m 2 )</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Mean ± SD</th><td>29.2 ± 5.3</td><td>28.6 ± 4.4</td><td>30.1 ± 5.9</td><td>30.0 ± 6.1</td><td>0.28</td></tr><tr><th>&lt; 25</th><td>16 (16)</td><td>11 (16)</td><td>20 (20)</td><td>15 (15)</td><td>0.31</td></tr><tr><th>25 - &lt; 30</th><td>46 (47)</td><td>38 (54)</td><td>35 (35)</td><td>44 (44)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>≥ 30</th><td>36 (37)</td><td>21 (30)</td><td>45 (45)</td><td>41 (41)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th colspan="2">Home/garden glyphosate use d</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>61 (62)</td><td>42 (60)</td><td>58 (58)</td><td>56 (56)</td><td>0.83</td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>37 (38)</td><td>28 (40)</td><td>42 (42)</td><td>44 (44)</td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>Abbreviation: SD, standard deviation.

a Presented as frequencies and percentages [n (%)] unless otherwise specified.

b P-value for differences across the four groups, calculated using analysis of variance for continuous variables and chi-squared or Fisher ' s exact (for race) tests for categorical variables.

c Black (n = 3), American Indian or Alaska Native (n = 1), or not reported (n = 3).

d In the last 12 months.

V.C. Chang et al.

Table 2 Selected percentiles and geometric means of urinary glyphosate concentrations (unadjusted and creatinine-corrected) among glyphosate-exposed and control groups in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture study, 2010 -2018.

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 2 Selected percentiles and geometric means of urinary glyphosate concentrations (unadjusted and creatinine-corrected) among glyphosate-exposed and control groups in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture study, 2010 -2018.</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Study group</th><th>n</th><th>Detection frequency (%)</th><th colspan="8">Urinary glyphosate concentration</th></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><th colspan="6">Selected percentiles</th><th>Maximum</th><th>Geometric mean (95 % CI)</th></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><th>10th</th><th>25th</th><th>50th</th><th>75th</th><th>90th</th><th>95th</th><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Recently exposed</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>µ g/L</th><td>98</td><td>90.8</td><td>0.24</td><td>0.40</td><td>0.77</td><td>1.44</td><td>3.84</td><td>15.2</td><td>35.2</td><td>0.89 (0.70, 1.13)</td></tr><tr><th>µ g/g creatinine</th><td>98</td><td></td><td>0.25</td><td>0.39</td><td>0.72</td><td>1.52</td><td>3.05</td><td>7.72</td><td>20.0</td><td>0.79 (0.64, 0.98)</td></tr><tr><th>High lifetime exposed</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>µ g/L</th><td>70</td><td>92.9</td><td>0.21</td><td>0.29</td><td>0.55</td><td>1.12</td><td>1.72</td><td>2.89</td><td>6.01</td><td>0.59 (0.48, 0.73)</td></tr><tr><th>µ g/g creatinine</th><td>70</td><td></td><td>0.20</td><td>0.30</td><td>0.47</td><td>0.79</td><td>1.41</td><td>1.64</td><td>2.67</td><td>0.51 (0.43, 0.60)</td></tr><tr><th>Farming controls</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>µ g/L</th><td>100</td><td>88.0</td><td>&lt; LOD</td><td>0.27</td><td>0.49</td><td>0.76</td><td>1.09</td><td>1.31</td><td>1.81</td><td>0.46 (0.40, 0.52)</td></tr><tr><th>µ g/g creatinine</th><td>100</td><td></td><td>- a</td><td>0.28</td><td>0.41</td><td>0.65</td><td>0.88</td><td>1.10</td><td>2.17</td><td>0.42 (0.37, 0.47)</td></tr><tr><th colspan="3">Nonfarming controls</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>µ g/L</th><td>100</td><td>81.0</td><td>&lt; LOD</td><td>0.24</td><td>0.38</td><td>0.62</td><td>1.02</td><td>1.56</td><td>2.69</td><td>0.39 (0.34, 0.46)</td></tr><tr><th>µ g/g creatinine</th><td>100</td><td></td><td>- a</td><td>0.24</td><td>0.37</td><td>0.55</td><td>0.92</td><td>1.08</td><td>1.74</td><td>0.37 (0.33, 0.42)</td></tr></tbody></table>Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; LOD, limit of detection (0.2 µ g/L).

a Not calculated because the uncorrected concentration is &lt; LOD.

Fig. 1. Geometric mean concentrations of creatinine-corrected urinary glyphosate ( µ g/g creatinine) among control and glyphosate-exposed study groups in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture study, 2010 -2018. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. P-values were obtained from pairwise comparisons of means of natural log-transformed creatinine-corrected urinary glyphosate concentrations using linear regression.

<!-- image -->

or loading glyphosate, whereas only 31 % reported glove/PPE use when applying glyphosate. Urinary glyphosate concentrations were highest among farmers who did not use any PPE and those who only used gloves (with no other PPE) while mixing/loading glyphosate, as well as among farmers who did not use any PPE while applying glyphosate, although comparisons within the recently exposed group were not statistically significant. When we examined specific PPE used within the recently exposed  farmers,  elevated  glyphosate  concentrations  were  observed among those who did not wear gloves while applying glyphosate (GMR = 1.91; 95 % CI: 1.17, 3.11) and those who did not wear a long-sleeved shirt  while  mixing/loading glyphosate (GMR = 2.00; 95 % CI: 1.04, 3.86);  however,  these  associations  were  attenuated  after  additional adjustment for number of days since last use of glyphosate [GMRs (95 %

CIs) = 1.49 (0.95, 2.34) and 1.61 (0.90, 2.88), respectively]. Furthermore, farmers who used broadcast/boom sprayers as the only glyphosate application method (31 %) had higher glyphosate concentrations than  those  who  used  hand  sprayers  (alone  or  with  broadcast/boom sprayers),  with  an  association  that  persisted  after  adjusting  for  days since last use (vs. hand spray only; GMR = 2.06; 95 % CI: 1.29, 3.27). Similarly,  farmers  who  applied glyphosate to  crops only  (31 %) had higher glyphosate concentrations than those who used glyphosate for non-crop applications only (GMR adjusting for days since last use = 1.83; 95 % CI: 1.18, 2.82).

In additional analyses examining occupational glyphosate use in the last 12 months (Table 4), we observed higher urinary glyphosate concentrations among recently exposed farmers in the highest tertiles of

V.C. Chang et al.

Table 3

Associations of recent occupational glyphosate use (last 7 days) and related characteristics with urinary glyphosate concentrations in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture study, 2010 -2018.

<table><tbody><tr><th>Characteristic</th><th>n</th><th colspan="2">Geometric mean concentration</th><th colspan="3">Geometric mean ratio (95 % CI)</th><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><th>µ g/L (95 % CI)</th><th>µ g/g creatinine (95 % CI)</th><th colspan="3">Model 1 a</th><th>Model 2 b</th></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><th>Compared to nonfarming controls</th><th>Compared to farming controls</th><th>Recently exposed only</th><th>Recently exposed only</th></tr><tr><th>Nonfarming controls</th><td>100</td><td>0.39 (0.34, 0.46)</td><td>0.37 (0.33, 0.42)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><th>Farming controls</th><td>100</td><td>0.46 (0.40, 0.52)</td><td>0.42 (0.37, 0.47)</td><td>-</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><th>Recently exposed</th><td>98</td><td>0.89 (0.70, 1.13)</td><td>0.79 (0.64, 0.98)</td><td>1.97 (1.53, 2.54)</td><td>1.82 (1.41, 2.33)</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><th colspan="8">Number of days since last use</th></tr><tr><th>5 - 7 days</th><td>42</td><td>0.52 (0.41, 0.66)</td><td>0.52 (0.42, 0.66)</td><td>1.30 (0.98, 1.72)</td><td>1.18 (0.89, 1.56)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>2 - 4 days</th><td>35</td><td>0.81 (0.57, 1.13)</td><td>0.71 (0.51, 0.98)</td><td>1.86 (1.38, 2.51)</td><td>1.70 (1.26, 2.28)</td><td>1.42 (0.95, 2.11)</td><td>1.42 (0.95, 2.11)</td></tr><tr><th>≤ 1 day</th><td>21</td><td>2.99 (1.61, 5.56)</td><td>2.20 (1.32, 3.69)</td><td>5.46 (3.75, 7.93)</td><td>5.29 (3.65, 7.66)</td><td>3.94 (2.40, 6.46)</td><td>3.94 (2.40, 6.46)</td></tr><tr><th colspan="8">Glove and other PPE c use while mixing/loading d</th></tr><tr><th>Both gloves and other PPE</th><td>17</td><td>0.49 (0.30, 0.81)</td><td>0.41 (0.26, 0.64)</td><td>1.25 (0.80, 1.95)</td><td>1.06 (0.68, 1.64)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>Gloves only</th><td>31</td><td>1.09 (0.76, 1.57)</td><td>0.94 (0.67, 1.31)</td><td>2.28 (1.61, 3.23)</td><td>2.19 (1.54, 3.10)</td><td>1.69 (0.89, 3.21)</td><td>1.70 (0.98, 2.95)</td></tr><tr><th>Other PPE only</th><td>4</td><td>0.60 (0.12, 2.99)</td><td>0.76 (0.25, 2.31)</td><td>1.55 (0.67, 3.61)</td><td>1.49 (0.64, 3.50)</td><td>1.19 (0.36, 3.95)</td><td>0.97 (0.34, 2.75)</td></tr><tr><th>Neither gloves nor other PPE</th><td>43</td><td>0.99 (0.65, 1.52)</td><td>0.93 (0.65, 1.32)</td><td>2.23 (1.63, 3.05)</td><td>2.07 (1.52, 2.82)</td><td>1.66 (0.89, 3.08)</td><td>1.17 (0.68, 2.03)</td></tr><tr><th colspan="8">Glove use while mixing/loading d</th></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>48</td><td>0.82 (0.61, 1.11)</td><td>0.70 (0.53, 0.93)</td><td>1.84 (1.36, 2.50)</td><td>1.68 (1.24, 2.28)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>47</td><td>0.95 (0.64, 1.41)</td><td>0.91 (0.66, 1.26)</td><td>2.15 (1.58, 2.92)</td><td>1.99 (1.46, 2.71)</td><td>1.14 (0.73, 1.75)</td><td>0.81 (0.54, 1.20)</td></tr><tr><th colspan="8">Wearing long-sleeved shirt while mixing/loading d</th></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>11</td><td>0.57 (0.34, 0.95)</td><td>0.44 (0.27, 0.71)</td><td>1.15 (0.68, 1.95)</td><td>1.00 (0.59, 1.71)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>84</td><td>0.94 (0.72, 1.22)</td><td>0.86 (0.68, 1.09)</td><td>2.14 (1.65, 2.76)</td><td>1.98 (1.53, 2.56)</td><td>2.00 (1.04, 3.86)</td><td>1.61 (0.90, 2.88)</td></tr><tr><th colspan="8">Wearing goggles while mixing/loading d</th></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>11</td><td>0.38 (0.19, 0.75)</td><td>0.41 (0.23, 0.73)</td><td>1.30 (0.76, 2.25)</td><td>1.09 (0.63, 1.87)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>84</td><td>0.99 (0.76, 1.28)</td><td>0.87 (0.69, 1.09)</td><td>2.10 (1.62, 2.73)</td><td>1.97 (1.52, 2.55)</td><td>1.30 (0.64, 2.66)</td><td>1.11 (0.60, 2.07)</td></tr><tr><th colspan="8">Glove and other PPE c use while applying e</th></tr><tr><th>Both gloves and other PPE</th><td>8</td><td>0.50 (0.22, 1.13)</td><td>0.44 (0.19, 1.04)</td><td>1.21 (0.67, 2.19)</td><td>1.06 (0.58, 1.92)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>Gloves only</th><td>15</td><td>0.61 (0.43, 0.87)</td><td>0.49 (0.33, 0.74)</td><td>1.22 (0.77, 1.92)</td><td>1.15 (0.73, 1.82)</td><td>0.97 (0.41, 2.31)</td><td>0.95 (0.44, 2.06)</td></tr><tr><th>Other PPE only</th><td>7</td><td>0.47 (0.21, 1.08)</td><td>0.49 (0.19, 1.24)</td><td>1.31 (0.69, 2.49)</td><td>1.11 (0.58, 2.11)</td><td>1.09 (0.40, 3.00)</td><td>0.90 (0.36, 2.22)</td></tr><tr><th>Neither gloves nor other PPE</th><td>66</td><td>1.12 (0.81, 1.54)</td><td>1.01 (0.78, 1.32)</td><td>2.50 (1.90, 3.29)</td><td>2.34 (1.79, 3.07)</td><td>1.99 (0.96, 4.13)</td><td>1.52 (0.79, 2.95)</td></tr><tr><th colspan="8">Glove use while applying e</th></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>23</td><td>0.57 (0.41, 0.79)</td><td>0.48 (0.33, 0.68)</td><td>1.21 (0.83, 1.78)</td><td>1.11 (0.76, 1.63)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>73</td><td>1.03 (0.76, 1.39)</td><td>0.94 (0.73, 1.21)</td><td>2.35 (1.80, 3.07)</td><td>2.18 (1.67, 2.84)</td><td>1.91 (1.17, 3.11)</td><td>1.49 (0.95, 2.34)</td></tr><tr><th colspan="8">Wearing long-sleeved shirt while applying e</th></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>9</td><td>0.54 (0.28, 1.03)</td><td>0.50 (0.25, 1.00)</td><td>1.24 (0.68, 2.27)</td><td>1.06 (0.58, 1.94)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>87</td><td>0.94 (0.73, 1.22)</td><td>0.84 (0.67, 1.05)</td><td>2.08 (1.60, 2.69)</td><td>1.95 (1.51, 2.52)</td><td>1.87 (0.86, 4.03)</td><td>1.29 (0.64, 2.58)</td></tr><tr><th colspan="8">Wearing goggles while applying e</th></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>5</td><td>0.34 (0.17, 0.66)</td><td>0.42 (0.23, 0.77)</td><td>1.03 (0.48, 2.22)</td><td>0.91 (0.42, 1.98)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>91</td><td>0.94 (0.73, 1.21)</td><td>0.83 (0.66, 1.04)</td><td>2.06 (1.59, 2.66)</td><td>1.91 (1.48, 2.47)</td><td>1.93 (0.75, 4.99)</td><td>1.62 (0.70, 3.78)</td></tr><tr><th colspan="8">Application method e,f</th></tr><tr><th>Hand spray only</th><td>32</td><td>0.90 (0.58, 1.39)</td><td>0.79 (0.53, 1.19)</td><td>1.83 (1.30, 2.59)</td><td>1.73 (1.22, 2.46)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>Broadcast/boom spray only</th><td>30</td><td>1.17 (0.70, 1.98)</td><td>1.07 (0.70, 1.66)</td><td>2.91 (2.02, 4.17)</td><td>2.60 (1.81, 3.72)</td><td>1.70 (1.00, 2.92)</td><td>2.06 (1.29, 3.27)</td></tr><tr><th>Both hand spray and</th><td>32</td><td>0.74 (0.53, 1.04)</td><td>0.64 (0.47, 0.87)</td><td>1.57 (1.12, 2.22)</td><td>1.48 (1.04, 2.09)</td><td>0.86 (0.52, 1.41)</td><td>1.08 (0.70, 1.66)</td></tr><tr><th colspan="8">broadcast/boom spray</th></tr><tr><th colspan="8">Application type e</th></tr><tr><th>Non-crop only g</th><td>36</td><td>0.76 (0.50, 1.15)</td><td>0.72 (0.49, 1.04)</td><td>1.73 (1.25, 2.40)</td><td>1.58 (1.13, 2.19)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>Crops only</th><td>30</td><td>1.25 (0.74, 2.11)</td><td>1.08 (0.70, 1.69)</td><td>2.97 (2.07, 4.26)</td><td>2.69 (1.88, 3.85)</td><td>1.72 (1.04, 2.84)</td><td>1.83 (1.18, 2.82)</td></tr><tr><th>Both non-crop and crops</th><td>30</td><td>0.78 (0.56, 1.08)</td><td>0.68 (0.50, 0.91)</td><td>1.61 (1.13, 2.30)</td><td>1.53 (1.07, 2.19)</td><td>0.89 (0.53, 1.47)</td><td>1.01 (0.64, 1.57)</td></tr></tbody></table>Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; PPE, personal protective equipment; Ref, reference.

Bold values indicate statistical significance at P &lt; 0.05.

a Adjusted for age (continuous, years), age squared, urinary creatinine concentration (natural log-transformed; continuous), state (Iowa, North Carolina), season of urine collection (April -September, October -March), time of urine collection (before 4:00 a.m., 4:00 -5:59 a.m., 6:00 a.m. or later), and body mass index (continuous, kg/m 2 ).

b Adjusted for Model 1 covariates (listed in footnote a) and additionally for number of days since last occupational use of glyphosate (5 -7, 2 -4, ≤ 1 days).

c Other PPE includes long-sleeved shirt, goggles, rubber boots, and/or respirator.

d Among recently exposed farmers who personally mixed or loaded glyphosate (n = 95).

e Among recently exposed farmers who personally applied glyphosate (n = 96).

f Analysis excludes one farmer who used airblast only and one farmer who used backpack sprayers only.

g Examples of non-crop applications include use around buildings, driveways, and fence rows.

V.C. Chang et al.

Table 4

Associations between occupational glyphosate use in the last 12 months and urinary glyphosate concentrations in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture study, 2010 -2018.

<table><caption><div class="caption">Associations between occupational glyphosate use in the last 12 months and urinary glyphosate concentrations in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture study, 2010 -2018.</div></caption><tbody><tr><th rowspan="3">Glyphosate use in the last 12 months</th><td></td><th colspan="2">n Geometric mean concentration</th><th colspan="3">Geometric mean ratio (95 % CI)</th><th rowspan="3">Model 2 b</th></tr><tr><td></td><th rowspan="2">µ g/L (95 % CI)</th><th rowspan="2">µ g/g creatinine (95 % CI)</th><th colspan="3">Model 1 a</th></tr><tr><td></td><th>Compared to nonfarming controls</th><th>Compared to farming controls</th><th>Exposed farmers only</th><td>Exposed farmers only</td></tr><tr><th>Nonfarming controls</th><td>100</td><td>0.39 (0.34, 0.46)</td><td>0.37 (0.33, 0.42)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><th>Farming controls</th><td>100</td><td>0.46 (0.40, 0.52)</td><td>0.42 (0.37, 0.47)</td><td>-</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><th>Recently exposed</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th colspan="4">Number of days of use in the last 12 months</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 1 (1 - 8)</th><td>35</td><td>0.56 (0.41, 0.76)</td><td>0.57 (0.41, 0.78)</td><td>1.40 (1.01, 1.94)</td><td>1.27 (0.91, 1.76)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 2 (9 - 15)</th><td>38</td><td>1.09 (0.69, 1.74)</td><td>0.96 (0.65, 1.40)</td><td>2.41 (1.76, 3.32)</td><td>2.21 (1.60, 3.05)</td><td>1.69 (1.07, 2.09)</td><td>1.40 (0.92, 2.12)</td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 3 (16 - 260)</th><td>25</td><td>1.22 (0.80, 1.86)</td><td>0.96 (0.65, 1.42)</td><td>2.40 (1.63, 3.52)</td><td>2.31 (1.57, 3.39)</td><td>1.52 (0.88, 2.62)</td><td>1.36 (0.84, 2.20)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>P trend c &lt; 0.0001</td><td>P trend c &lt; 0.0001</td><td>P trend c = 0.13</td><td>P trend c = 0.21</td></tr><tr><th colspan="4">Intensity-weighted days of use in the last 12 months</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 1 (88 - 528)</th><td>33</td><td>0.59 (0.41, 0.87)</td><td>0.63 (0.44, 0.91)</td><td>1.65 (1.18, 2.32)</td><td>1.46 (1.04, 2.06)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 2 ( &gt; 528 - 1,080)</th><td>34</td><td>0.83 (0.58, 1.19)</td><td>0.66 (0.48, 0.90)</td><td>1.62 (1.16, 2.27)</td><td>1.54 (1.10, 2.14)</td><td>0.90 (0.54, 1.50)</td><td>0.93 (0.59, 1.48)</td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 3 ( &gt; 1,080 - 11,375)</th><td>31</td><td>1.45 (0.89, 2.38)</td><td>1.24 (0.83, 1.87)</td><td>3.03 (2.14, 4.29)</td><td>2.82 (1.99, 3.99)</td><td>1.62 (0.98, 2.68)</td><td>1.21 (0.76, 1.93)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>P trend c &lt; 0.0001</td><td>P trend c &lt; 0.0001</td><td>P trend c = 0.02</td><td>P trend c = 0.32</td></tr><tr><th>High lifetime exposed</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th colspan="4">Number of days of use in the last 12 months</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 1 (0 - 5)</th><td>24</td><td>0.72 (0.51, 1.02)</td><td>0.57 (0.42, 0.78)</td><td>1.58 (1.17, 2.14)</td><td>1.31 (0.97, 1.76)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 2 (6 - 20)</th><td>28</td><td>0.58 (0.41, 0.83)</td><td>0.50 (0.39, 0.66)</td><td>1.40 (1.06, 1.84)</td><td>1.24 (0.95, 1.62)</td><td>0.92 (0.61, 1.38)</td><td>0.93 (0.60, 1.43)</td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 3 (21 - 120)</th><td>18</td><td>0.47 (0.31, 0.71)</td><td>0.45 (0.33, 0.59)</td><td>1.29 (0.93, 1.80)</td><td>1.17 (0.84, 1.63)</td><td>0.92 (0.55, 1.53)</td><td>0.93 (0.54, 1.61)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>P trend c = 0.12</td><td>P trend c = 0.30</td><td>P trend c = 0.74</td><td>P trend c = 0.81</td></tr><tr><th colspan="4">Intensity-weighted days of use in the last 12 months</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 1 (0 - 440)</th><td>24</td><td>0.69 (0.48, 0.98)</td><td>0.58 (0.43, 0.77)</td><td>1.60 (1.18, 2.16)</td><td>1.31 (0.97, 1.76)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 2 ( &gt; 440 - 1,485)</th><td>23</td><td>0.52 (0.34, 0.79)</td><td>0.42 (0.31, 0.56)</td><td>1.21 (0.89, 1.65)</td><td>1.08 (0.80, 1.46)</td><td>0.73 (0.46, 1.15)</td><td>0.73 (0.45, 1.19)</td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 3 ( &gt; 1,485 - 4,800)</th><td>23</td><td>0.58 (0.41, 0.83)</td><td>0.54 (0.41, 0.72)</td><td>1.48 (1.10, 1.98)</td><td>1.34 (1.01, 1.78)</td><td>1.00 (0.65, 1.54)</td><td>1.00 (0.63, 1.59)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>P trend c = 0.04</td><td>P trend c = 0.10</td><td>P trend c = 0.69</td><td>P trend c = 0.63</td></tr><tr><th colspan="4">Recently exposed and high lifetime exposed</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th colspan="4">Number of days of use in the last 12 months</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 1 (0 - 6)</th><td>56</td><td>0.59 (0.46, 0.74)</td><td>0.55 (0.44, 0.69)</td><td>1.44 (1.11, 1.88)</td><td>1.26 (0.97, 1.65)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 2 (7 - 15)</th><td>60</td><td>0.93 (0.67, 1.29)</td><td>0.81 (0.62, 1.06)</td><td>2.07 (1.60, 2.68)</td><td>1.87 (1.44, 2.43)</td><td>1.41 (1.01, 1.97)</td><td>1.21 (0.89, 1.65)</td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 3 (16 - 260)</th><td>52</td><td>0.76 (0.58, 1.01)</td><td>0.63 (0.50, 0.81)</td><td>1.72 (1.31, 2.26)</td><td>1.58 (1.20, 2.07)</td><td>1.18 (0.82, 1.69)</td><td>1.09 (0.79, 1.52)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>P trend c &lt; 0.0001</td><td>P trend c = 0.0002</td><td>P trend c = 0.50</td><td>P trend c = 0.69</td></tr><tr><th colspan="4">Intensity-weighted days of use in the last 12 months</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 1 (0 - 512)</th><td>56</td><td>0.68 (0.52, 0.89)</td><td>0.63 (0.50, 0.81)</td><td>1.69 (1.30, 2.20)</td><td>1.48 (1.13, 1.94)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td><td>1.00 (Ref)</td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 2 ( &gt; 512 - 1,320)</th><td>56</td><td>0.67 (0.51, 0.87)</td><td>0.54 (0.44, 0.68)</td><td>1.46 (1.12, 1.90)</td><td>1.32 (1.01, 1.72)</td><td>0.84 (0.59 1.19)</td><td>0.81 (0.59, 1.12)</td></tr><tr><th>Tertile 3 ( &gt; 1,320 - 11,375)</th><td>56</td><td>0.92 (0.66, 1.29)</td><td>0.83 (0.63, 1.10)</td><td>2.09 (1.61, 2.72)</td><td>1.92 (1.47, 2.50)</td><td>1.20 (0.85, 1.69)</td><td>1.01 (0.74, 1.40)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>P trend c &lt; 0.0001</td><td>P trend c &lt; 0.0001</td><td>P trend c = 0.11</td><td>P trend c = 0.57</td></tr></tbody></table>Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; Ref, reference.

Bold values indicate statistical significance at P &lt; 0.05.

a Adjusted for age (continuous, years), age squared, urinary creatinine concentration (natural log-transformed; continuous), state (Iowa, North Carolina), season of urine collection (April -September, October -March), time of urine collection (before 4:00 a.m., 4:00 -5:59 a.m., 6:00 a.m. or later), and body mass index (continuous, kg/m 2 ).

b Adjusted for Model 1 covariates (listed in footnote a) and additionally for number of days since last occupational use of glyphosate ( &gt; 180, 31 -180, 8 -30, 5 -7, 2 -4, ≤ 1 days).

c Calculated by modeling within-category median values (setting as ' 0 ″ for the nonfarming and farming control groups) as continuous variables.

glyphosate use, including a statistically significant trend for intensityweighted days of use (tertile 3 vs. 1; GMR = 1.62; 95 % CI: 0.98, 2.68; Ptrend = 0.02); however, the association was attenuated and lost statistical  significance  after  adjusting  for  days  since  last  use.  Although glyphosate concentrations were also generally elevated for all tertiles of lifetime glyphosate use relative to the control groups, we did not observe any  statistically  significant  trend  across  tertiles  of  lifetime  days  or intensity-weighted lifetime days of use among exposed farmers (Supplementary Table S3).

## 4. Discussion

This urinary biomonitoring study among farmers and nonfarmers is one of the largest and most detailed investigations to date of occupational  glyphosate  exposure  and  its  potential  determinants.  We  found that high proportions of both farmers (88 -93 %, depending on the study group)  and  nonfarmers  (81  %)  from  Iowa  and  North  Carolina  had detectable concentrations of glyphosate (LOD = 0.2 µ g/L) in their urine. The  strongest  determinant  of  urinary  glyphosate  concentrations  was recency  of  occupational  glyphosate  use,  with  substantial  exposure contrast  observed  between  those  with  and  without  self-reported  use within  7  days  prior  to  urine  sampling,  as  well  as  a  clear  trend  of increasing  concentrations with  shorter time  elapsed  since  last  use  of glyphosate.  We  also  observed  elevated  glyphosate  concentrations among recently exposed farmers who did not wear gloves when applying glyphosate, those who did not wear a long-sleeved shirt when mixing/ loading glyphosate, and those who applied glyphosate exclusively using broadcast/boom sprayers or to crops only.

Glyphosate  was  detected  in  the  urine  of  approximately  90  %  of farmers in our study. This is higher than those reported by most previous occupational biomonitoring studies of farmers (0 -75 %; LODs ranging from  0.05  to  5 µ g/L)  in  the  United  States  (Acquavella  et  al.,  2004; Curwin et al., 2007; Perry et al., 2019) and abroad (Rend ´ on-von Osten and  Dzul-Caamal,  2017;  Wongta  et  al.,  2018;  Balderrama-Carmona et  al.,  2020;  Connolly  et  al.,  2022;  Mueller  et  al.,  2024),  although several studies in Sri Lanka (Jayasumana et al., 2015), Thailand (Bootsikeaw  et  al.,  2021),  and  New  Zealand  (Campbell  et  al.,  2022)  had detection frequencies of &gt; 95 %. Urinary glyphosate concentrations also varied widely across studies, with central tendency measures (median or GMs) ranging from &lt; LOD to 73.5 µ g/L (mostly ~ 0.5 -3 µ g/L) among

V.C. Chang et al.

farmers (Gillezeau et al., 2019; Gillezeau et al., 2020; Connolly et al., 2020); concentrations in our study are in the lower end of this range. However, comparisons across studies should be interpreted with caution in  light  of  differences  in  analytical  methods  (e.g.,  enzyme-linked immunosorbent  assay,  mass  spectrometry  with  different  chromatography methods), method sensitivities, and urine sample type (e.g., spot, 24-hour, first  morning void) (Gillezeau  et al.,  2019;  Gillezeau  et  al., 2020; Connolly et al., 2020). The large variability in urinary glyphosate concentrations may also reflect differences in participant characteristics (e.g.,  age),  timing  of  glyphosate  use  with  respect  to  urine  sampling, regulations surrounding glyphosate use in agricultural and other settings,  application  practices,  and  PPE  use  across  farming  populations from different parts of the world.

Urinary glyphosate concentrations among nonfarmers in our study [GM = 0.39 µ g/L (0.37 µ g/g creatinine)] are similar to those observed in a  nationally  representative  sample  of  the  general  U.S.  population  in NHANES [GMs = 0.41 and 0.35 µ g/L (0.44 and 0.37 µ g/g creatinine) in 2013 -2014 and 2015 -2016, respectively] (Ospina et al., 2022; National Center for Environmental Health, 2022). Of note, glyphosate concentrations  in  our  study  were  quantified  by  the  same  laboratory  that measured glyphosate in NHANES using the same analytical approach with the same LOD (Ospina et al., 2022; Schütze et al., 2021). Similar concentrations  were  also  observed  among  NHANES  subgroups  with demographics comparable to our study (e.g., GM = 0.42 µ g/L for both males and non-Hispanic White persons) (Ospina et al., 2022). Although our study consisted of an older population (age ≥ 50 years), the association we observed between increasing age and increasing glyphosate concentrations  among  nonfarmers  (and  recently  exposed  farmers)  is consistent with that among adults ≥ 20 years of age in NHANES, (Ospina et al., 2022). In contrast, a large study of the French general population observed  a  continuous  decrease  in  glyphosate  concentrations  with increasing age (Grau et al., 2022), while the few occupational studies examining age as a potential determinant in farmers found no associations (Perry et al., 2019; Bootsikeaw et al., 2021; Mueller et al., 2024). Beyond possible age-related differences in exposure sources and pathways, detailed toxicokinetics of glyphosate remain to be fully elucidated (Connolly et al., 2020). We also noted a potential difference in urinary glyphosate concentrations by time of urine collection among recently exposed farmers, with a less clear pattern after correction for creatinine; this may be related to factors such as time since last urination, although this information was not available in our study. Furthermore, while our study  lacked  information  on  fasting  status  and  dietary  consumption, data from NHANES suggested higher urinary glyphosate concentrations among individuals who fasted for ≤ 8 (vs. &gt; 8) hours prior to urine collection and those who consumed cereal in the last 24 h, highlighting diet as a primary source of exposure in the general population (Ospina et al., 2022) and the importance of evaluating glyphosate residues in contaminated  foods  (European  Food  Safety  Authority  (EFSA),  2019; Kolakowski et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2019). Additionally, an organic diet was found to reduce urinary glyphosate concentrations in two intervention trials (Fagan et al., 2020; Hyland et al., 2023), including one reporting a stronger effect among individuals living further away from agricultural fields (Hyland et al., 2023). Given the relatively large proportion of nonfarmers with detectable glyphosate, future biomonitoring studies, especially those in the general population, should incorporate detailed  dietary  assessment  to  provide  a  fuller  picture  of  potential exposure sources.

Similar  to  our  findings,  higher  detection  frequencies  and/or  concentrations  of  urinary  glyphosate  were  observed  among  farmers compared to nonfarmers in most other studies that quantified glyphosate  in  both  subgroups  (Curwin  et  al.,  2007;  Connolly  et  al.,  2022; Campbell  et  al.,  2022;  Grau  et  al.,  2022;  Jayasumana  et  al.,  2015; Rend ´ on-von Osten and Dzul-Caamal, 2017; Wongta et al., 2018), suggesting  that  agricultural  use  of  glyphosate  is  an  important  source  of exposure.  With  detailed  information  on  the  timing  of  occupational glyphosate  use,  our  study  further  confirmed  that  recency  of  use, particularly across a range of ≤ 1 -7 days since last use, is an important predictor of urinary glyphosate concentrations among farmers. Consistent with the short urine elimination half-life of glyphosate (~5 -10 h) (Connolly  et  al.,  2019;  Zoller  et  al.,  2020;  Kohsuwan  et  al.,  2022), several studies among farmers (Acquavella et al., 2004; Mesnage et al., 2012; Bootsikeaw et al., 2021; Mueller et al., 2024) and amenity horticulturists (Connolly et al., 2017; Connolly et al., 2018) with serial urine samples also reported higher concentrations shortly after (vs. before) glyphosate application and declining concentrations over time following application.  Notably,  in  addition  to  the  much  higher  concentrations among farmers  who  used  glyphosate  in  the  last  day,  we  also  found significantly elevated concentrations among those with use in the last 2 -4 days (and elevated, albeit not statistically significant, concentrations for use in the last 5 -7 days) compared to each of the control groups, suggesting that despite the short half-life, glyphosate applicators may have  exposures  even  several  days  after  reported  use  (e.g.,  through contaminated  clothing  and  equipment).  Furthermore,  although  we found no associations with home/garden glyphosate use in the last 12 months (yes vs. no) among both farmers and nonfarmers and had no information on timing of home/garden use for farmers, the observation of  higher  glyphosate  concentrations  among  a  small  number  of  nonfarmers with more recent use (8 -30 vs. &gt; 30 days before urine collection) warrants additional investigation. There is a paucity of data on exposure  specifically  related  to  residential  use of  glyphosate.  In NHANES, use of any chemical products in the lawn or garden to kill weeds in the last 7 days was not associated with urinary glyphosate concencentrations (Ospina et al., 2022).

Our  study  was  one  of  the  very  few  to  assess  urinary  glyphosate concentrations in relation to PPE use among farmers. Our results suggest that PPE use, particularly gloves when applying and long-sleeved shirts when  mixing/loading  glyphosate,  may  help  reduce  exposure.  In  an investigation of 48 farmers from the Farm Family Exposure Study in South Carolina and Minnesota, farmers who did not wear rubber gloves when mixing/loading glyphosate had statistically significantly higher urinary glyphosate concentrations compared to those who wore gloves; however, use of gloves or other PPE during glyphosate application was not  evaluated  (Acquavella  et  al.,  2004).  Another  study  of  43  Thai farmers found that wearing long (vs. short) sleeved shirts when mixing and spraying glyphosate was associated with lower glyphosate concentrations  in  both  urine  and  dermal  patch  samples  (Bootsikeaw  et  al., 2021).  Together,  these  findings  highlight  skin  contact  as  a  potential major route of exposure among farmers who use glyphosate. However, it should be noted that while approximately two-thirds of farmers in our study  were  hand  spray  applicators,  all  farmers  in  the  Farm  Family Exposure Study applied glyphosate using boom sprayers and tractors (Acquavella  et  al.,  2004),  and  most  farmers  in  the  Thai  study  used backpack sprayers (Bootsikeaw et al., 2021). Interestingly, we found the highest  urinary  glyphosate  concentrations  among  the  one-third  of farmers  who  applied  glyphosate  exclusively  using  broadcast/boom sprayers  and  lower  concentrations  among  those  who  used  hand sprayers.  Conversely, the AHS pesticide exposure intensity algorithm assigned greater weight to hand spray than broadcast and boom spray (Coble et al., 2011). Our findings may be explained by potential differences  in  glyphosate-based  formulations  used,  work  practices,  frequency and duration of applications, and exposure pathways and routes across different application methods (Connolly et al., 2017; Arbuckle et  al.,  2002).  Notably,  we found that application method was highly correlated with application type (i.e., broadcast/boom spray and hand spray for crop and non-crop applications, respectively); it is likely that glyphosate  applications  to  crops  involved  more  frequent  and  longer periods  of  spraying  and  products  with  higher  active  ingredient  concentrations  compared  to  non-crop  applications.  Farmers  applying glyphosate to crops may also be exposed to residues on crops during reentry activities (Toumi et al., 2019), which warrant further exploration in relation to urinary glyphosate concentrations in other studies conducted in different agricultural settings.

V.C. Chang et al.

Given the short half-life of glyphosate in urine, it is not surprising that  cumulative  measures  of  long-term  (past  12-month  or  lifetime) occupational glyphosate use showed no exposure -response associations with urinary glyphosate concentrations among farmers after adjusting for days since last use. However, when compared with nonfarmers, we found statistically significantly elevated concentrations among farmers who were high lifetime (but not recent) users of glyphosate, as well as non-statistically significantly higher concentrations among farmers with minimal lifetime use. Because urinary glyphosate is a marker of recent exposure,  this  novel  finding  is  interesting  and  suggests  that  these farmers, though not having personally used glyphosate recently, may be indirectly  exposed  in  their  work  environment,  especially  given  the relatively longer half-life of glyphosate in soil (~2 -200 days, but typically &lt; 60 days) (Giesy et al., 2000; Agricultural Research Service (ARS), 1995). Exposure may have also occurred through household dust, which can  serve  as  a  long-term  reservoir  of  pesticide  residues  entering  the farmers ' homes via contaminated clothes and shoes and from nearby agricultural  applications  (Simcox  et  al.,  1995;  Curl  et  al.,  2023). Notably, a small study of five farm and six nonfarm households in Iowa observed higher dust concentrations of glyphosate in farm households (Curwin et al., 2005), with positive but nonsignificant correlations between  dust  and  urine  concentrations  (Curwin  et  al.,  2007).  Another study  in  the  general  population  of  California  reported  significantly higher glyphosate dust concentrations in households that had members with  occupational  pesticide  exposure,  households  with  pesticide  use around the home to treat lawn/garden weeds, and those with nearby (within 1 km of the home) agricultural use of glyphosate (Ward et al., 2023). Additional studies quantifying glyphosate in both urine and dust can help better characterize recent and longer-term glyphosate exposure and potential determinants among farmers as well as their spouses and children.

The  main  strengths  of  our  study  include  the  larger  sample  size compared to  other  occupational  biomonitoring  studies  of  glyphosate among farmers, highly reproducible measurements of urinary glyphosate quantified by the same method used in NHANES, inclusion of both farming  and  nonfarming  control  groups,  and  availability  of  detailed information on occupational glyphosate use, including timing of use and other related characteristics (e.g., PPE use, application method/type), as well as home/garden glyphosate use. Our study also had several limitations. First, because glyphosate was quantified in a single first morning void urine sample, we could not evaluate within-individual changes in concentrations over time, and given the short urine half-life of glyphosate and the timing of urine collection with respect to glyphosate use, we may have missed peak exposures and underestimated exposure even among  farmers  who  used  glyphosate  on  the  day  prior  to  the  urine sampling. As such, exposure differences between groups may be even greater than those reflected by measured urine concentrations. Second, unlike  several  occupational  biomonitoring  studies  in  farmers  (Perry et al., 2019; Balderrama-Carmona et al., 2020; Connolly et al., 2022; Campbell et al., 2022), we did not measure urinary concentrations of aminomethylphosphonic acid (AMPA), the main metabolite of glyphosate. However, because of limited glyphosate metabolism in humans, AMPA is generally detected not as frequently and at lower concentrations than glyphosate in urine (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), 2020; Gillezeau et al., 2019; Connolly et al., 2020). AMPA  is  also  known  to  form  as  a  breakdown  product  of  other phosphonate-containing compounds, such as detergents, and thus may not  specifically  reflect  glyphosate  exposure  (Grandcoin  et  al.,  2017). Nevertheless, future biomonitoring studies incorporating AMPA, as well as  surfactant  co-formulants  (e.g.,  polyethoxylated  amine)  present  in glyphosate-based products (Mesnage et al., 2019), may help provide a more comprehensive assessment of exposures related to glyphosate use in both occupational and non-occupational settings (Connolly and Koch, 2023). Third, information on PPE use among recently exposed farmers was based on their usual practices when mixing/loading or applying glyphosate in the last 12 months, which may not necessarily apply to the most recent instance of use. Similarly, for farmers who reported using both hand and broadcast/boom sprayers, it is unclear which method (or both) was used during the most recent application. Fourth, information on recency of home/garden pesticide use was only available for nonfarmers.  Finally,  our  study  included  a  predominantly  non-Hispanic White  population,  and  as  such,  results  may  not  be  generalizable  to other populations of farmers or farmworkers. Future investigations of urinary glyphosate concentrations and their determinants would benefit from including farmers and farmworkers from diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds in various agricultural settings across different geographic areas.

## 5. Conclusions

Findings from this large biomonitoring study of male farmers and nonfarmers from Iowa and North Carolina suggest that while a high proportion of both farmers and nonfarmers may be exposed to glyphosate,  substantial  exposure  contrast  was  detectable  in  urine  between those with and without recent occupational glyphosate use. In addition, factors such as PPE use and application method and type were associated with urinary glyphosate concentrations among farmers, which may have implications for strategies to reduce occupational exposure. Given the widespread use of glyphosate, continued biomonitoring of this herbicide in various settings is warranted.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

Vicky  C.  Chang: Writing -original  draft,  Methodology,  Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Maria Ospina: Writing -review &amp; editing, Methodology. Shuai  Xie: Writing -review &amp; editing,  Methodology. Gabriella Andreotti: Writing -review &amp; editing, Conceptualization. Christine G. Parks: Writing -review &amp; editing. Danping Liu: Writing -review &amp; editing, Methodology. Jessica M. Madrigal: Writing -review &amp; editing. Mary  H.  Ward: Writing -review &amp; editing. Nathaniel Rothman: Conceptualization,  Writing -review &amp; editing. Debra  T. Silverman: Conceptualization,  Writing -review &amp; editing. Dale  P. Sandler: Writing -review &amp; editing. Melissa C. Friesen: Methodology, Writing -review &amp; editing. Laura E. Beane Freeman: Conceptualization, Writing -review &amp; editing. Antonia M. Calafat: Methodology, Writing -review &amp; editing. Jonathan N. Hofmann: Writing -original draft, Supervision, Methodology, Conceptualization, Formal analysis.

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Data availability

The data underlying this investigation will be provided upon request as  described  for  the  BEEA  subcohort  on  the  AHS  website:  https:// aghealth.nih.gov/collaboration/studies.html.

## Acknowledgements

The authors thank Amy Miller, Kate Torres, Sarah Woodruff, and Marsha Dunn (Westat, Rockville, MD) and Anne Taylor (Information Management Services, Rockville, MD) for study coordination and data management; Andre Schütze, Pilar Morales-Agudelo, and Meghan Vidal (CDC, Atlanta, GA) for the quantification of urinary  glyphosate concentrations;  and  Anna  Lukkari  (University  of  Minnesota  Advanced Research and Diagnostic Laboratory, Minneapolis, MN) for measuring the urinary creatinine concentrations. The authors gratefully acknowledge the participants of the BEEA study that made this work possible.

V.C. Chang et al.

## Funding

This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute (Z01 CP 010119) and  National  Institute  of  Environmental  Health  Sciences  (Z01  ES 049030).

## Disclaimer

The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the CDC. Use of trade names is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the CDC, the Public Health Service, or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

## Appendix A. Supplementary material

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.envint.2024.108644.

## References

- Acquavella, J.F., Alexander, B.H., Mandel, J.S., Gustin, C., Baker, B., Chapman, P., Bleeke, M., 2004. Glyphosate biomonitoring for farmers and their families: Results from the Farm Family Exposure Study. Environ. Health Perspect. 112 (3), 321 -326. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.6667.
- Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), 2020. Toxicological profile for glyphosate. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service. https://wwwn.cdc.gov/TSP/ToxProfiles/ToxProfiles.aspx?id = 1488 &amp; tid = 293. [accessed 14 February 2023].
- Agricultural Research Service (ARS), 1995. ARS pesticide properties, last update May 1995. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. https://www.ars.usda.gov/ARSUserFiles/00000000/DatabaseFiles/Pe sticidePropertiesDatabase/IndividualPesticideFiles/glyphosate.TXT. [accessed 21 November 2023].
- Alavanja, M.C., Sandler, D.P., McMaster, S.B., Zahm, S.H., McDonnell, C.J., Lynch, C.F., Pennybacker, M., Rothman, N., Dosemeci, M., Bond, A.E., Blair, A., 1996. The Agricultural Health Study. Environ. Health Perspect. 104 (4), 362 -369. https://doi. org/10.1289/ehp.96104362.
- Arbuckle, T.E., Burnett, R., Cole, D., Teschke, K., Dosemeci, M., Bancej, C., Zhang, J., 2002. Predictors of herbicide exposure in farm applicators. Int. Arch. Occup. Environ. Health 75 (6), 406 -414. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00420-002-0323-7.
- Atwood, D., Paisley-Jones, C., 2017. Pesticides industry sales and usage: 2008 -2012 market estimates. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. https ://www.epa.gov/pesticides/pesticides-industry-sales-and-usage-2008-2012-marketestimates.
- Balderrama-Carmona, A.P., Valenzuela-Rinc ´ on, M., Zamora-´ Alvarez, L.A., AdanBante, N.P., Leyva-Soto, L.A., Silva-Beltr ´ an, N.P., Mor ´ an-Palacio, E.F., 2020. Herbicide biomonitoring in agricultural workers in Valle del Mayo, Sonora Mexico. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 27 (23), 28480 -28489. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11356-019-07087-6.
- Benbrook, C.M., 2016. Trends in glyphosate herbicide use in the United States and globally. Environ. Sci. Eur. 28 (1), 3. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12302-016-0070-0.
- Bootsikeaw, S., Kongtip, P., Nankongnab, N., Chantanakul, S., Sujirarat, D., Mahaboonpeeti, R., Khangkhun, P., Woskie, S., 2021. Urinary glyphosate biomonitoring of sprayers in vegetable farm in Thailand. Hum. Ecol. Risk Assess. 27 (4), 1019 -1036. https://doi.org/10.1080/10807039.2020.1797471.
- Campbell, G., Mannetje, A., Keer, S., Eaglesham, G., Wang, X., Lin, C.Y., Hobson, P., Toms, L.M., Douwes, J., Thomas, K.V., Mueller, J.F., Kaserzon, S., 2022. Characterization of glyphosate and AMPA concentrations in the urine of Australian and New Zealand populations. Sci. Total Environ. 847, 157585 https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.157585.
- Chang, V.C., Andreotti, G., Ospina, M., Parks, C.G., Liu, D., Shearer, J.J., Rothman, N., Silverman, D.T., Sandler, D.P., Calafat, A.M., Beane Freeman, L.E., Hofmann, J.N., 2023. Glyphosate exposure and urinary oxidative stress biomarkers in the Agricultural Health Study. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 115 (4), 394 -404. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/jnci/djac242.
- Coble, J., Thomas, K.W., Hines, C.J., Hoppin, J.A., Dosemeci, M., Curwin, B., Lubin, J.H., Beane Freeman, L.E., Blair, A., Sandler, D.P., Alavanja, M.C., 2011. An updated algorithm for estimation of pesticide exposure intensity in the Agricultural Health Study. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 8 (12), 4608 -4622. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/ijerph8124608.
- Connolly, A., Jones, K., Galea, K.S., Basinas, I., Kenny, L., McGowan, P., Coggins, M., 2017. Exposure assessment using human biomonitoring for glyphosate and fluroxypyr users in amenity horticulture. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 220 (6), 1064 -1073. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2017.06.008.
- Connolly, A., Basinas, I., Jones, K., Galea, K.S., Kenny, L., McGowan, P., Coggins, M.A., 2018. Characterising glyphosate exposures among amenity horticulturists using
- multiple spot urine samples. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 221 (7), 1012 -1022. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2018.06.007.
- Connolly, A., Coggins, M.A., Galea, K.S., Jones, K., Kenny, L., McGowan, P., Basinas, I., 2019. Evaluating glyphosate exposure routes and their contribution to total body burden: A study among amenity horticulturalists. Ann. Work. Expo. Health 63 (2), 133 -147. https://doi.org/10.1093/annweh/wxy104.
- Connolly, A., Jones, K., Basinas, I., Galea, K.S., Kenny, L., McGowan, P., Coggins, M.A., 2019. Exploring the half-life of glyphosate in human urine samples. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 222 (2), 205 -210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2018.09.004.
- Connolly, A., Coggins, M.A., Koch, H.M., 2020. Human biomonitoring of glyphosate exposures: State-of-the-art and future research challenges. Toxics 8 (3), 60. https:// doi.org/10.3390/toxics8030060.
- Connolly, A., Koch, H.M., Bury, D., Koslitz, S., Kolossa-Gehring, M., Conrad, A., Murawski, A., McGrath, J.A., Leahy, M., Brüning, T., Coggins, M.A., 2022. A human biomonitoring study assessing glyphosate and aminomethylphosphonic acid (AMPA) exposures among farm and non-farm families. Toxics 10 (11), 690. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/toxics10110690.
- Connolly, A., Koch, H.M., 2023. Invited perspective: The continuing debate-is glyphosate a problem, and can an organic diet protect us from exposures? Environ. Health Perspect. 131 (7), 71304. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp13053.
- Curl, C.L., Hyland, C., Spivak, M., Sheppard, L., Lanphear, B., Antoniou, M.N., Ospina, M., Calafat, A.M., 2023. The effect of pesticide spray season and residential proximity to agriculture on gyphosate exposure among pregnant people in Southern Idaho, 2021. Environ. Health Perspect. 131 (12), 127001 https://doi.org/10.1289/ EHP12768.
- Curwin, B.D., Hein, M.J., Sanderson, W.T., Nishioka, M.G., Reynolds, S.J., Ward, E.M., Alavanja, M.C., 2005. Pesticide contamination inside farm and nonfarm homes. J. Occup. Environ. Hyg. 2 (7), 357 -367. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 15459620591001606.
- Curwin, B.D., Hein, M.J., Sanderson, W.T., Striley, C., Heederik, D., Kromhout, H., Reynolds, S.J., Alavanja, M.C., 2007. Urinary pesticide concentrations among children, mothers and fathers living in farm and non-farm households in Iowa. Ann. Occup. Hyg. 51 (1), 53 -65. https://doi.org/10.1093/annhyg/mel062.
- European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), 2019. Review of the existing maximum residue levels for glyphosate according to Article 12 of Regulation (EC) no 396/2005 revised version to take into account omitted data. EFSA J. 17 (10), e05862 https:// doi.org/10.2903/j.efsa.2019.5862.
- Fagan, J., Bohlen, L., Patton, S., Klein, K., 2020. Organic diet intervention significantly reduces urinary glyphosate levels in U.S. children and adults. Environ. Res. 189, 109898 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.109898.
- Giesy, J.P., Dobson, S., Solomon, K.R., 2000. Ecotoxicological risk assessment for Roundup ® herbicide, in: Ware, G.W. (Ed.), Reviews of environmental contamination and toxicology: Continuation of residue reviews. New York, NY: Springer New York, pp. 35 -120. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-1156-3\_2.
- Gillezeau, C., van Gerwen, M., Shaffer, R.M., Rana, I., Zhang, L., Sheppard, L., Taioli, E., 2019. The evidence of human exposure to glyphosate: A review. Environ. Health 18 (1), 2. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-018-0435-5.
- Gillezeau, C., Lieberman-Cribbin, W., Taioli, E., 2020. Update on human exposure to glyphosate, with a complete review of exposure in children. Environ. Health 19 (1), 115. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-020-00673-z.
- Grandcoin, A., Piel, S., Baur ` es, E., 2017. Aminomethylphosphonic acid (AMPA) in natural waters: Its sources, behavior and environmental fate. Water Res. 117, 187 -197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2017.03.055.
- Grau, D., Grau, N., Gascuel, Q., Paroissin, C., Stratonovitch, C., Lairon, D., Devault, D.A., Di Cristofaro, J., 2022. Quantifiable urine glyphosate levels detected in 99% of the French population, with higher values in men, in younger people, and in farmers. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 29 (22), 32882 -32893. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11356-021-18110-0.
- Guyton, K.Z., Loomis, D., Grosse, Y., El Ghissassi, F., Benbrahim-Tallaa, L., Guha, N., Scoccianti, C., Mattock, H., Straif, K., 2015. Carcinogenicity of tetrachlorvinphos, parathion, malathion, diazinon, and glyphosate. Lancet Oncol 16 (5), 490 -491. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(15)70134-8.
- Hofmann, J.N., Beane Freeman, L.E., Lynch, C.F., Andreotti, G., Thomas, K.W., Sandler, D.P., Savage, S.A., Alavanja, M.C., 2015. The Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture (BEEA) study: Rationale, design, methods, and participant characteristics. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health A 78 (21 -22), 1338 -1347. https://doi. org/10.1080/15287394.2015.1091414.
- Hornung, R.W., Reed, L.D., 1990. Estimation of average concentration in the presence of nondetectable values. Appl. Occup. Environ. Hyg. 5 (1), 46 -51. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/1047322X.1990.10389587.
- Hyland, C., Spivak, M., Sheppard, L., Lanphear, B.P., Antoniou, M., Ospina, M., Calafat, A.M., Curl, C.L., 2023. Urinary glyphosate concentrations among pregnant participants in a randomized, crossover trial of organic and conventional diets. Environ. Health Perspect. 131 (7), 77005. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp12155.
- Jayasumana, C., Gunatilake, S., Siribaddana, S., 2015. Simultaneous exposure to multiple heavy metals and glyphosate may contribute to Sri Lankan agricultural nephropathy. BMC Nephrol. 16, 103. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-015-0109-2. Kogevinas, M., 2019. Probable carcinogenicity of glyphosate. BMJ 365, l1613. https://
- doi.org/10.1136/bmj.l1613.
- Kohsuwan, K., Intayoung, U., Khacha-Ananda, S., Sapbamrer, R., Koonrungsesomboon, N., Techatoei, S., Wunnapuk, K., 2022. Urinary glyphosate kinetics after occupational exposure. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 245, 114021. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2022.114021.
- Kolakowski, B.M., Miller, L., Murray, A., Leclair, A., Bietlot, H., van de Riet, J.M., 2020. Analysis of glyphosate residues in foods from the Canadian retail markets between

V.C. Chang et al.

- 2015 and 2017. J. Agric. Food Chem. 68 (18), 5201 -5211. https://doi.org/10.1021/ acs.jafc.9b07819.
- Mesnage, R., Moesch, C., Le Grand, R., Lauthier, G., Spiroux de Vend ˆ omois, J., Gress, S., S ´ eralini, G.E., 2012. Glyphosate exposure in a farmer ' s family. J. Environ. Prot. 3 (9), 1001 -1003. https://doi.org/10.4236/jep.2012.39115.
- Mesnage, R., Antoniou, M.N., 2017. Facts and fallacies in the debate on glyphosate toxicity. Front. Public Health 5, 316. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2017.00316.
- Mesnage, R., Benbrook, C., Antoniou, M.N., 2019. Insight into the confusion over surfactant co-formulants in glyphosate-based herbicides. Food Chem. Toxicol. 128, 137 -145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2019.03.053.
- Mueller, W., Jones, K., Fuhrimann, S., Ahmad, Z., Sams, C., Harding, A.H., Povey, A., Atuhaire, A., Basinas, I., van Tongeren, M., Kromhout, H., Galea, K.S., 2024. Factors influencing occupational exposure to pyrethroids and glyphosate: An analysis of urinary biomarkers in Malaysia, Uganda and the United Kingdom. Environ. Res. 242, 117651 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2023.117651.
- Mu ˜ noz, J.P., Silva-Pavez, E., Carrillo-Beltr ´ an, D., Calaf, G.M., 2023. Occurrence and exposure assessment of glyphosate in the environment and its impact on human beings. Environ. Res. 231 (Pt 3), 116201 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. envres.2023.116201.
- Myers, J.P., Antoniou, M.N., Blumberg, B., Carroll, L., Colborn, T., Everett, L.G., Hansen, M., Landrigan, P.J., Lanphear, B.P., Mesnage, R., Vandenberg, L.N., vom Saal, F.S., Welshons, W.V., Benbrook, C.M., 2016. Concerns over use of glyphosatebased herbicides and risks associated with exposures: A consensus statement. Environ. Health 15, 19. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-016-0117-0.
- National Center for Environmental Health, 2022. National report on human exposure to environmental chemicals. Updated September 2023. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. https: //www.cdc.gov/exposurereport/. [accessed 15 March 2024].
- Ospina, M., Schütze, A., Morales-Agudelo, P., Vidal, M., Wong, L.Y., Calafat, A.M., 2022. Exposure to glyphosate in the United States: Data from the 2013 -2014 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Environ. Int. 170, 107620 https://doi. org/10.1016/j.envint.2022.107620.
- Perry, M.J., Mandrioli, D., Belpoggi, F., Manservisi, F., Panzacchi, S., Irwin, C., 2019. Historical evidence of glyphosate exposure from a US agricultural cohort. Environ. Health 18 (1), 42. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-019-0474-6.
- Portier, C.J., Armstrong, B.K., Baguley, B.C., Baur, X., Belyaev, I., Bell ´ e, R., Belpoggi, F., Biggeri, A., Bosland, M.C., Bruzzi, P., Budnik, L.T., Bugge, M.D., Burns, K., Calaf, G. M., Carpenter, D.O., Carpenter, H.M., L ´ opez-Carrillo, L., Clapp, R., Cocco, P., Consonni, D., Comba, P., Craft, E., Dalvie, M.A., Davis, D., Demers, P.A., De Roos, A. J., DeWitt, J., Forastiere, F., Freedman, J.H., Fritschi, L., Gaus, C., Gohlke, J.M., Goldberg, M., Greiser, E., Hansen, J., Hardell, L., Hauptmann, M., Huang, W., Huff, J., James, M.O., Jameson, C.W., Kortenkamp, A., Kopp-Schneider, A., Kromhout, H., Larramendy, M.L., Landrigan, P.J., Lash, L.H., Leszczynski, D., Lynch, C.F., Magnani, C., Mandrioli, D., Martin, F.L., Merler, E., Michelozzi, P., Miligi, L., Miller, A.B., Mirabelli, D., Mirer, F.E., Naidoo, S., Perry, M.J., Petronio, M.
- G., Pirastu, R., Portier, R.J., Ramos, K.S., Robertson, L.W., Rodriguez, T., R ¨ o ¨ osli, M., Ross, M.K., Roy, D., Rusyn, I., Saldiva, P., Sass, J., Savolainen, K., Scheepers, P.T., Sergi, C., Silbergeld, E.K., Smith, M.T., Stewart, B.W., Sutton, P., Tateo, F., Terracini, B., Thielmann, H.W., Thomas, D.B., Vainio, H., Vena, J.E., Vineis, P., Weiderpass, E., Weisenburger, D.D., Woodruff, T.J., Yorifuji, T., Yu, I.J., Zambon, P., Zeeb, H., Zhou, S.F., 2016. Differences in the carcinogenic evaluation of glyphosate between the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). J. Epidemiol. Community Health 70 (8), 741 -745. https://doi.org/10.1136/jech-2015-207005.
- Rend ´ on-von Osten, J., Dzul-Caamal, R., 2017. Glyphosate residues in groundwater, drinking water and urine of subsistence farmers from intensive agriculture localities: A survey in Hopelch ´ en, Campeche, Mexico. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 14 (6), 595. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14060595.
- Schütze, A., Morales-Agudelo, P., Vidal, M., Calafat, A.M., Ospina, M., 2021. Quantification of glyphosate and other organophosphorus compounds in human urine via ion chromatography isotope dilution tandem mass spectrometry. Chemosphere 274, 129427. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.129427.
- Simcox, N.J., Fenske, R.A., Wolz, S.A., Lee, I.C., Kalman, D.A., 1995. Pesticides in household dust and soil: Exposure pathways for children of agricultural families. Environ. Health Perspect. 103 (12), 1126 -1134. https://doi.org/10.1289/ ehp.951031126.
- Toumi, K., Joly, L., Vleminckx, C., Schiffers, B., 2019. Exposure of workers to pesticide residues during re-entry activities: A review. Hum. Ecol. Risk Assess. 25 (8), 2193 -2215. https://doi.org/10.1080/10807039.2018.1485092.
- U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 2017. Revised glyphosate issue paper: Evaluation of carcinogenic potential. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPP-20090361-0073. [accessed 7 February 2023].
- Valle, A.L., Mello, F.C.C., Alves-Balvedi, R.P., Rodrigues, L.P., Goulart, L.R., 2019. Glyphosate detection: Methods, needs and challenges. Environ. Chem. Lett. 17 (1), 291 -317. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-018-0789-5.
- Ward, M.H., Madrigal, J.M., Jones, R.R., Friesen, M.C., Falk, R.T., Koebel, D., Metayer, C., 2023. Glyphosate in house dust and risk of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia in California. Environ. Int. 172, 107777 https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.envint.2023.107777.
- Wongta, A., Sawarng, N., Tongchai, P., Sutan, K., Kerdnoi, T., Prapamontol, T., Hongsibsong, S., 2018. The pesticide exposure of people living in agricultural community, Northern Thailand. J. Toxicol. 2018, 4168034. https://doi.org/ 10.1155/2018/4168034.
- Xu, J., Smith, S., Smith, G., Wang, W., Li, Y., 2019. Glyphosate contamination in grains and foods: An overview. Food Control 106, 106710. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. foodcont.2019.106710.
- Zoller, O., Rhyn, P., Zarn, J.A., Dudler, V., 2020. Urine glyphosate level as a quantitative biomarker of oral exposure. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 228, 113526. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2020.113526.