<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ecoenv

## Association of glyphosate exposure with frailty and all-cause mortality in general adults: A population-based cohort study

<!-- image -->

Tongtong Yang 1 , Liuhua Zhou 1 , Peng Jing 1 , Yulin Bao , Lingfeng Gu , Yixi Chen , Xinying Shi , Hao Wang, Liansheng Wang *,2 , Sibo Wang *,3

<!-- image -->

Department of Cardiology, the First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China

## A R T I C L E  I N F O

Edited by Dr. RENJIE CHEN

Keywords: Glyphosate exposure Frailty Mortality General adults NHANES

## 1. Introduction

Glyphosate is a broad-spectrum organophosphorus herbicide and the most  widely  utilized  herbicide  in  global  agriculture,  with  its  use continuing to increase (Myers et al., 2016). Evidence reveals that the majority of US general population have experienced recent exposure to glyphosate, suggesting a widespread glyphosate exposure (Ospina et al., 2022). Individuals can be exposed to glyphosate through various routes, for  example,  dermal  absorption,  inhalation,  and  dietary  intake  (de Morais Valentim et al., 2024). Previous animal studies, case reports, and some observational studies have indicated that glyphosate exposure is

* Corresponding authors.

E-mail addresses: drlswang@njmu.edu.cn (L. Wang), sibowang@njmu.edu.cn (S. Wang).

1 These authors contributed equally to this work.

2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8538-6560.

3 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3204-2710.

## https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2025.118096

Received 3 December 2024; Received in revised form 14 February 2025; Accepted 19 March 2025

A B S T R A C T

Background: Glyphosate is the most widely used herbicide globally. However, its association with frailty, an emerging public health concern, and mortality in the general population remains unclear.

Methods: This cohort utilized the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2013 -2018 data, with follow-up through December 31, 2019. Weighted logistic regression, Cox regression, and restricted cubic splines analyses were performed to investigate the association of urinary glyphosate with frailty, defined using a 49-item frailty index at baseline, and all-cause mortality, respectively. Causal mediation analysis and sensitivity analysis were also employed.

Results: 4697 adults (mean age: 47.1 years; 48.9 % male) were included. Multivariable logistic regression showed that elevated urinary glyphosate correlated with increased frailty prevalence (log2-transformed, adjusted OR = 1.14, 95 % CI: 1.04 -1.25; quartiles, P for trend = 0.002), with a linear dose-response relationship ( P value for nonlinearity = 0.568). During a median follow-up of 3.9 years, 238 total deaths occurred. Multivariable-adjusted Cox regression demonstrated that urinary glyphosate was positively related to all-cause mortality (log2-transformed, adjusted HR = 1.19, 95 % CI: 1.07 -1.31; quartiles, P for trend = 0.005). Additionally, frailty significantly  mediated  the  association  between  glyphosate  and  all-cause  mortality,  with  mediation  proportion  of 30.3 %.

Conclusions: Urinary glyphosate was positively associated with frailty and all-cause mortality in the general US adult population. Frailty also played a partial mediator role in this relationship. These findings provide new evidence of adverse health effects of glyphosate and imply that enhanced efforts should be made to mitigate exposure to glyphosate.

positively  linked  to  nausea  and  vomiting  (Luo  et  al.,  2019),  allergic wheeze (Hoppin et al., 2017), hypothyroidism (Shrestha et al., 2018), and miscarriages (Camacho and Mejia, 2017). Moreover, the carcinogenicity of glyphosate has caused much controversy. In 2015, the International Agency for Research on Cancer under the WHO re-classified it as a ' Group 2A ' carcinogen, indicating it is probably carcinogenic to humans (Guyton et al., 2015). Conversely, other researchers and regulatory agencies stated that glyphosate did not pose significant carcinogenic threat to humans under appropriate use (Meftaul et al., 2020). Given its widespread global use, further research involving large-scale investigations is urgently needed to explore the relationship between

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Fig. 1. Flowchart of the study population (n = 4697 included in the final analysis).

<!-- image -->

glyphosate and other human health outcomes.

Frailty  is  a  multifaceted  and  complex  clinical  condition,  which  is marked  by  multi-system  functional  declines  and  driven  by  interconnected  biological  and  psychosocial  vulnerabilities  (Dent  et  al., 2019). As the global elderly population continues to increase, frailty has emerged as a substantial public health concern, posing a tremendous challenge to human health. Large meta-analyses estimated that 17.4 % of older adults in the community suffered from frailty (Siriwardhana et  al.,  2018),  with  an  overall  incidence  of  43.4  cases  per  1000 person-years (Ofori-Asenso et al., 2019). Currently, the two predominant  diagnostic  models  of  frailty  are  the  Fried ' s  phenotypic  criteria (Fried et al., 2001) and the frailty index model that quantifies frailty through a composite index incorporating psychosocial, cognitive, and clinical domains (Searle et al., 2008). Abundant data and evidence have shown  that  frailty  is  associated  with  hospitalizations  and  escalated healthcare burdens, deteriorative quality of life, and elevated risk of mortality (Hoogendijk et al., 2019). Nevertheless, the relationship between  glyphosate  exposure  and  frailty  has  not  been  elucidated.  In addition, most previous studies on glyphosate and death are based on animal  experiments,  case  reports  (Cho  et  al.,  2019),  or  case-control studies  with  limited  sample  sizes  (Moon  et  al.,  2018).  Therefore,  to achieve a more comprehensive understanding of the impact of glyphosate on mortality, large-scale prospective investigations in the general population are warranted.

To address these research gaps, the present study aimed to examine the association of urinary glyphosate levels with frailty, as defined by a comprehensive frailty index method, as well as all-cause mortality in adults, and to determine whether frailty played a mediator role, using data from a nationally representative cohort from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES).

## 2. Methods

## 2.1. Study design and participants

NHANES is a nationwide survey and employs a complex, multistage, stratified probability sampling design to collect comprehensive healthrelated  characteristics  from  a  representative  sample  of  the  noninstitutionalized population in the United States. Detailed information regarding  the  survey ' s  design,  methodology,  and  estimation  data  is available elsewhere (Johnson et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2020) and can also be accessed at https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/index.htm. The protocols of NHANES were approved by the NCHS Research Ethics Review Board, and all participants provided written informed consent.

Urinary glyphosate level was measured only in three NHANES cycles: 2013 -2014, 2015 -2016, and 2017 -2018. Thus, these 3 cycles were utilized in this study. Of the 7067 participants with urinary glyphosate data, 2328 were excluded due to the absence of frailty index or mortality data (n = 2328). Further exclusions were made for participants without urinary creatinine (UCr) value (n = 1) at baseline or those who were pregnant (n = 41). Ultimately, the final analysis included a total of 4697 US adults (Fig. 1).

## 2.2. Measurement of urinary glyphosate

In  brief,  according  to  NHANES  methodology  documents,  urinary glyphosate level was measured using the 2D-on-line IC-MS/MS technique (Schutze et al., 2021). Further details on the measurement process of glyphosate are described elsewhere (Schutze et al., 2021; Jauregui-Zunzunegui et al., 2024) and can be found at https://wwwn. cdc.gov/Nchs/Nhanes/2013 -2014/SSGLYP\_H.htm. To account for urine dilution, urinary glyphosate levels were corrected by UCr levels and expressed as μ g/g of UCr in this study (Ospina et al., 2022). Subsequently, unweighted UCr-corrected glyphosate concentrations were then divided into quartiles: quartile 1 ( ≤ 0.192, n = 1175), quartile 2 (0.192 -0.326,  n = 1177),  quartile  3  (0.326 -0.584,  n = 1171),  and quartile 4 ( &gt; 0.584, n = 1174).

## 2.3. Definitions of covariates

The covariates in this study were selected based on a combination of prior  glyphosate-related  studies  (Li  et  al.,  2023;  Han  et  al.,  2024; Untalan et al., 2024), accepted or commonly used risk factors associated with frailty and mortality, and included common demographic characteristics (participants ' age, gender, race/ethnicity, education level, and family income-to-poverty ratio [PIR]), medical history (encompassing hypertension, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia), as well as lifestyle-related behaviors (smoking status, alcohol consumption, and physical activity). These data were collected through structured interviews, standardized questionnaires, and physical/laboratory examinations.

Race/ethnicity and education level were grouped according to official demographic classifications. PIR represents the economic status of

Table 1 Baseline characteristics of the study population, grouped by the quartiles of urinary glyphosate.

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 1 Baseline characteristics of the study population, grouped by the quartiles of urinary glyphosate.</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Characteristic</th><th>Overall (n = 4697)</th><th colspan="5">Quartiles of urinary glyphosate (unweighted)</th></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><th>Q1 (n = 1175)</th><th>Q2 (n = 1177)</th><th>Q3 (n = 1171)</th><th>Q4 (n = 1174)</th><th>P value</th></tr><tr><th>Age, y</th><td>47.1 (0.4)</td><td>42.7 (0.5)</td><td>45.0 (0.8)</td><td>48.2 (0.8)</td><td>52.8 (0.6)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Gender, %</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Male</th><td>48.9 (1.1)</td><td>59.5 (1.8)</td><td>51.6 (2.8)</td><td>45.3 (1.9)</td><td>38.5 (2.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Female</th><td>51.1 (1.1)</td><td>40.5 (1.8)</td><td>48.4 (2.8)</td><td>54.7 (1.9)</td><td>61.5 (2.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Race/ethnicity, %</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Mexican American</th><td>9.0 (1.1)</td><td>10.9 (1.6)</td><td>9.8 (1.3)</td><td>7.9 (1.3)</td><td>7.1 (0.9)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Other Hispanic</th><td>6.6 (0.7)</td><td>7.5 (0.9)</td><td>7.5 (0.9)</td><td>5.3 (0.9)</td><td>6.1 (0.9)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Non-Hispanic White</th><td>63.6 (1.9)</td><td>55.2 (2.8)</td><td>60.7 (2.2)</td><td>68.7 (2.3)</td><td>70.3 (2.3)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Non-Hispanic Black</th><td>11.4 (1.1)</td><td>15.1 (1.7)</td><td>12.4 (1.6)</td><td>9.7 (1.2)</td><td>8.0 (1.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Other race</th><td>9.4 (0.7)</td><td>11.3 (1.3)</td><td>9.6 (1.1)</td><td>8.4 (1.0)</td><td>8.5 (1.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Education level, %</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.345</td></tr><tr><th>&lt; 9th grade</th><td>4.4 (0.3)</td><td>3.9 (0.5)</td><td>4.8 (0.6)</td><td>4.0 (0.5)</td><td>5.1 (0.5)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>9 - 11th grade</th><td>8.6 (0.6)</td><td>9.1 (0.7)</td><td>8.6 (0.7)</td><td>8.4 (1.2)</td><td>8.2 (1.3)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>High school</th><td>22.7 (1.0)</td><td>24.6 (1.7)</td><td>20.0 (1.3)</td><td>24.6 (2.2)</td><td>21.5 (1.9)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>College</th><td>33.1 (1.2)</td><td>32.4 (2.3)</td><td>36.0 (2.1)</td><td>33.1 (2.1)</td><td>30.7 (2.4)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Graduate or above</th><td>31.2 (1.7)</td><td>30.0 (2.6)</td><td>30.6 (2.6)</td><td>29.9 (2.6)</td><td>34.5 (2.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Hypertension, %</th><td>37.8 (1.1)</td><td>32.0 (2.1)</td><td>37.3 (2.2)</td><td>39.2 (2.2)</td><td>42.9 (1.7)</td><td>0.005</td></tr><tr><th>Diabetes, %</th><td>14.1 (0.6)</td><td>10.4 (1.2)</td><td>13.5 (1.5)</td><td>13.9 (1.1)</td><td>18.7 (1.1)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Hyperlipidemia, %</th><td>66.3 (1.0)</td><td>63.5 (2.1)</td><td>63.4 (2.3)</td><td>67.4 (1.8)</td><td>71.0 (1.5)</td><td>0.018</td></tr><tr><th>Smoker, %</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.271</td></tr><tr><th>Never</th><td>57.9 (1.1)</td><td>58.7 (1.8)</td><td>59.3 (2.3)</td><td>55.5 (2.2)</td><td>58.1 (2.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Former</th><td>23.1 (1.0)</td><td>20.3 (1.6)</td><td>23.8 (2.4)</td><td>23.9 (2.0)</td><td>24.7 (1.9)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Current</th><td>19.0 (0.8)</td><td>21.0 (1.3)</td><td>16.9 (1.8)</td><td>20.6 (1.6)</td><td>17.2 (1.4)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Alcohol user, %</th><td>81.2 (1.2)</td><td>85.7 (1.7)</td><td>79.7 (1.8)</td><td>81.7 (1.7)</td><td>77.1 (1.7)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Physical activity, %</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.094</td></tr><tr><th>Below</th><td>18.5 (0.8)</td><td>15.7 (1.5)</td><td>17.4 (1.6)</td><td>21.0 (2.1)</td><td>20.1 (2.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Meet</th><td>12.5 (0.6)</td><td>10.8 (1.2)</td><td>12.9 (1.3)</td><td>11.5 (1.1)</td><td>14.9 (1.6)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Exceed</th><td>69.0 (1.0)</td><td>73.5 (1.7)</td><td>69.7 (1.6)</td><td>67.5 (2.0)</td><td>65.0 (3.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>PIR</th><td>3.00 (0.05)</td><td>2.94 (0.07)</td><td>3.03 (0.08)</td><td>3.03 (0.09)</td><td>3.01 (0.09)</td><td>0.504</td></tr><tr><th>BMI, kg/m 2</th><td>29.3 (0.2)</td><td>29.7 (0.3)</td><td>29.4 (0.3)</td><td>29.5 (0.3)</td><td>28.6 (0.3)</td><td>0.007</td></tr><tr><th>eGFR, mL/min/1.73 m 2</th><td>94.9 (0.6)</td><td>97.4 (0.9)</td><td>97.2 (1.0)</td><td>93.9 (1.0)</td><td>91.0 (0.7)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>UCr, mg/dL</th><td>122.2 (1.9)</td><td>159.1 (3.6)</td><td>132.3 (3.2)</td><td>107.0 (3.3)</td><td>88.3 (4.1)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Frailty index</th><td>0.141 (0.002)</td><td>0.126 (0.003)</td><td>0.132 (0.003)</td><td>0.148 (0.003)</td><td>0.160 (0.004)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Frailty, %</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>18.6 (0.7)</td><td>13.5 (1.3)</td><td>15.2 (1.3)</td><td>20.2 (1.5)</td><td>25.9 (1.6)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>81.4 (0.7)</td><td>86.5 (1.3)</td><td>84.8 (1.3)</td><td>79.8 (1.5)</td><td>74.1 (1.6)</td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>PIR, family income-to-poverty ratio; BMI, body mass index; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; UCr, urinary creatinine. Data was reported as weighted mean (SE) or weighted percentages (SE).

the household, with a higher PIR indicating a higher family economic income (Bao  et  al.,  2020).  Hypertension  (including  self-reported  hypertension diagnosis, antihypertensive medications  use, or systolic/diastolic  blood  pressure ≥ 140/90 mmHg monitored in  NHANES mobile examination centers) and diabetes (characterized by self-reported diabetes diagnosis, use of antidiabetic medications, fasting plasma glucose ≥ 126 mg/dL, a random glucose ≥ 200 mg/dL, HbA1c ≥ 6.5 %, or 2-h oral glucose tolerance test ≥ 200 mg/dL) were defined in accordance  with  accepted  clinical  guidelines  (Williams  et  al.,  2018; ADA, 2024). Smoking status was divided into: (1) never smoker, participants smoking &lt; 100 cigarettes in their lifetime; (2) former smoker, &gt; 100 cigarettes but not smoke at the time of survey; (3) current smoker, &gt; 100 cigarettes and still smoked at the time of survey (Bao et al., 2020). Alcohol drinking was assessed according to whether alcohol consumption is ≥ 12 alcoholic drinks in one year (Xu et al., 2021). Physical activity was based on moderate-intensity exercise duration or equivalent and divided into ' below ' ( &lt; 150 min/wk of moderate-intensity exercise), ' meet ' (150 -300 min/wk  of  moderate-intensity  exercise  or equivalent), or ' exceed ' ( ≥ 300 min/wk of moderate-intensity exercise) groups according to established guidelines  (Piercy  et al.,  2018).  The estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was derived using the widely accepted CKD-EPI equation developed by Levey and colleagues (Levey et al., 2009).

## 2.4. Ascertainment of frailty and mortality

Frailty at baseline was defined using the frailty index, as introduced by Searle et al. (2008) and subsequently developed and validated in other studies using data from NHANES (Hakeem et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2019). Specifically, a 49-item frailty index across multiple health domains was used, encompassing cognition problem (1 item), difficulties with  dependence  (15  items),  symptoms  of  depression  (7  items), self-reported multiple comorbidities (13 items), hospital utilization and general health condition (5 items), BMI and handgrip strength (2 items), and blood biomarkers (6 items) (Hakeem et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2019). A detailed list of the frailty index items and their corresponding scores are provided in Supplementary Table 1 . Consistent with other studies, frailty was defined as a frailty index greater than 0.21 (Hakeem et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2019).

Information on mortality data for all participants were prospectively gathered  until  December  31,  2019  and  are  publicly  available  (http s://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data-linkage/mortality-public.htm). The outcome  in  this  study  was  all-cause  mortality.  Follow-up  time  was computed as the time period from the date of baseline urinary glyphosate measurement to either death or the end of follow-up, whichever came first.

## 2.5. Statistical analysis

Statistical  analysis  was  conducted  in  accordance  with  NHANES guidelines, with sample weights, stratification and clustering utilized in all analyses to consider the complex sampling design of NHANES (Bao et al., 2020). Specifically, the ' svyset ' command in Stata and the ' survey ' package in R software were used to account for the complex design of  NHANES.  Stratification  and  clustering  were  directly  provided  in NHANES  source  files,  and  NHANES  also  provided  specific  sample

weights for urinary glyphosate (variable names: WTSSCH2Y in NHANES 2013 -2014,  WTSSGL2Y  in  NHANES  2015 -2016,  and  WTSSBJ2Y  in NHANES 2017 -2018). According to NHANES analytic guidelines, when integrating  data  across  multiple  survey  cycles,  the  original  sample weights should be divided by the number of combined cycles, i.e., the original weights for urinary glyphosate divided by 3 in the present study.

Continuous variables were reported as weighted mean with standard error (SE), and categorical variables were shown as weighted percentages  with  SE.  Given  the  positively  skewed  distribution  of  urinary glyphosate, a log2-transformation was applied (Han et al., 2024).

The associations of urinary glyphosate with frailty index (continuous variable)  and  frailty  (dichotomous  variable)  were  investigated  using weighted linear and logistic regression, respectively. In addition, the proportional hazards assumption for urinary glyphosate and all-cause mortality  was  met  ( P = 0.113),  as  confirmed  by  Schoenfeld ' s  residuals. Weighted Kaplan-Meier curves were constructed to graph cumulative all-cause mortality incidence on time scales of both follow-up time  and  participants ' age,  and  Cox  regression  was  also  employed. Model 1 was the crude and unadjusted model. Model 2 was adjusted for age, gender and race, which are recognized unmodifiable demographic variables. Model 3 was adjusted for model 2 plus education level, PIR, smoking  status,  alcohol  drinking,  history  of  hypertension,  diabetes, hyperlipidemia,  physical  activity,  eGFR  and  BMI.  For  most  of  the covariates in this study, the proportions of missing values were below 5 %,  while  for  alcohol  drinking,  PIR  and  physical  activity,  the  proportions of missing values were 6.2 %, 9.4 % and 25.3 %, respectively (Supplementary Table 2). Thus, to minimize the sample loss, multiple imputation by chained equations was applied using the ' mice ' package (Zhang,  2016).  Furthermore,  multivariable-adjusted  restricted  cubic splines (RCS) using three default knots (10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles) were also employed (Qiu et al., 2022).

Besides, a causal mediation analysis with multivariable adjustments was conducted to investigate whether frailty could mediate the association  of  urinary  glyphosate  with  all-cause  mortality.  The  mediation proportion  was  calculated  using  the  product  method  described  by VanderWeele based on counterfactual framework (Jaskulski et al., 2018; VanderWeele, 2011). In brief, the total effect of urinary glyphosate on all-cause mortality can be split into direct and indirect (through frailty) effect. Among them, the natural direct effect (NDE) captures the direct pathway from the exposure (urinary glyphosate) to the outcome (all-cause death), independent of the mediator (frailty index), and the natural indirect effect (NIE) quantifies the effect of the exposure on the outcome that acts through the mediator. The proportion of mediation was calculated using the following formula: [HRNDE × (HRNIE-1)]/(HRNDE × HRNIE-1) (Jaskulski et al., 2018; VanderWeele, 2011). In addition, sensitivity analyses were also performed. First, we re-performed the statistical analysis using the original values without multiple imputation to determine whether the imputation had a significant  effect  on  the  results.  Second,  urinary  glyphosate  was  analyzed without  UCr  correction,  with  UCr  treated  as  a  separate  covariate  in multivariable regression models (Barr et al., 2005). Third, participants who died within the first  year  of  follow-up  were  excluded  from  the analysis to reduce the risk of reverse causation bias (Qiu et al., 2022).

Stata software (16.0, StataCorp LLC, USA) and R software (4.2.3) were used for all statistical analysis. A two-tailed P value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## 3. Results

## 3.1. Baseline characteristics of this study

A comparison of baseline characteristics of participants before and after multiple imputation is shown in Supplementary Table 2. Compared with the original values, all variables in this study showed no significant difference after imputation (all P &gt; 0.05), suggesting that imputation had a minimal impact on the values.

## Table 2

Crude  and  adjusted  association  of  urinary  glyphosate  with  frailty  index (continuous variable) and frailty (dichotomous variable).

<table><tbody><tr><th>Outcome</th><th>N</th><th>Model 1</th><th>Model 2</th><th>Model 3</th></tr><tr><th>Frailty index, β (95% CI)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Glyphosate (log 2 - transformed)</td><td>4697</td><td>0.011 (0.008, 0.014)***</td><td>0.005 (0.002, 0.008)**</td><td>0.005 (0.002, 0.008)**</td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate (categorical)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Q1</td><td>1175</td><td>Ref.</td><td>Ref.</td><td>Ref.</td></tr><tr><td>Q2</td><td>1177</td><td>0.006 ( 0.003, 0.015)</td><td>0.002 ( 0.006, 0.009)</td><td>0.001 ( 0.006, 0.007)</td></tr><tr><td>Q3</td><td>1171</td><td>0.022 (0.013, 0.032)***</td><td>0.013 (0.004, 0.021)**</td><td>0.010 (0.003, 0.018)**</td></tr><tr><td>Q4</td><td>1174</td><td>0.035 (0.024, 0.045)***</td><td>0.016 (0.006, 0.026)**</td><td>0.016 (0.005, 0.026)**</td></tr><tr><td>P for trend</td><td></td><td>&lt; 0.001</td><td>0.001</td><td>0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Frailty, OR (95% CI)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Glyphosate (log 2 - transformed)</td><td>4697</td><td>1.26 (1.17, 1.36)***</td><td>1.12 (1.04, 1.21)**</td><td>1.14 (1.04, 1.25)**</td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate (categorical)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Q1</td><td>1175</td><td>Ref.</td><td>Ref.</td><td>Ref.</td></tr><tr><td>Q2</td><td>1177</td><td>1.14 (0.83, 1.57)</td><td>1.02 (0.74, 1.40)</td><td>0.94 (0.68, 1.29)</td></tr><tr><td>Q3</td><td>1171</td><td>1.61 (1.24, 2.10)**</td><td>1.31 (0.99, 1.74)</td><td>1.27 (0.95, 1.69)</td></tr><tr><td>Q4</td><td>1174</td><td>2.23 (1.68, 2.95)***</td><td>1.55 (1.14, 2.12)**</td><td>1.66 (1.15, 2.39)**</td></tr><tr><td>P for trend</td><td></td><td>&lt; 0.001</td><td>0.001</td><td>0.002</td></tr></tbody></table>Association between urinary glyphosate and frailty index was analyzed using weighted  linear  regression,  and  association  between  urinary  glyphosate  and frailty  was  analyzed  using  weighted  logistic  regression.  OR,  odds  ratio;  CI, confidence interval.

Model 1: unadjusted.

Model 2: adjusted for age, gender and race.

Model 3: adjusted for model 2 plus education level, PIR, hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, smoking, alcohol drinking, psychical activity, eGFR and BMI.

** P &lt; 0.01.

*** P &lt; 0.001.

4697 adult participants (mean age, 47.1 years; males, 48.9 %), representing 239 million US adults, were included. Baseline characteristics of  the  study  participants stratified  by quartiles of urinary glyphosate levels are displayed in Table 1. The geometric mean of urinary glyphosate level was 0.334 μ g/g UCr. The weighted mean of frailty index was 0.141 and the overall prevalence of frailty was 18.6 %. Participants with elevated urinary glyphosate levels were significantly older and more likely to be female and non-Hispanic White, with a higher prevalence of hypertension,  diabetes,  hyperlipidemia,  and  frailty  (all P &lt; 0.05). Additionally, they also exhibited higher frailty index and lower baseline levels of BMI, eGFR, and UCr (all P &lt; 0.05). However, no significant differences were observed across urinary glyphosate quartiles in education level, smoking status, physical activity, or PIR (all P &gt; 0.05).

## 3.2. Association between urinary glyphosate and frailty

Multiple linear and logistic regression models were conducted, as shown in Table 2. In model 3 (fully-adjusted model), urinary glyphosate (log2-transformed)  was  significantly  and  positively  correlated  with frailty index ( β = 0.005, 95 % CI: 0.002 -0.008, P = 0.001). Besides, β (95 % CI) of the highest quartile (Q4) vs. the lowest quartile (Q1) of urinary glyphosate was 0.016 (0.005, 0.026) ( P for trend = 0.001) in model 3 and remained consistent in other two models ( P for trend &lt; 0.001  and = 0.001,  respectively).  Similarly,  multivariable  logistic regression also revealed that urinary glyphosate (log2-transformed) was significantly associated with increased frailty prevalence (OR = 1.14, 95 % CI: 1.04 -1.25, P = 0.009). Compared to those in Q1, participants

Fig. 2. Restricted cubic splines (RCS) analyses of the association of urinary glyphosate with frailty index (A) and frailty (B). Analyses were adjusted for model 3, including participants ' age, gender, race, education level, PIR, history of hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, smoking status, alcohol drinking, physical activity, eGFR, and BMI.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3. Weighted Kaplan-Meier curves for all-cause mortality with time scales of both follow-up time (A) and participants ' age (B). The P values are derived from the log-rank test.

<!-- image -->

in Q4 group had a 66 % higher odds of frailty (OR = 1.66, 95 % CI: 1.15 -2.39) ( P for trend = 0.002) in model 3 and also remained consistent  in  model  1  and  model  2  ( P for  trend &lt; 0.001  and = 0.001, respectively).

Furthermore, RCS analysis confirmed these findings and showed a linear and monotonically increasing association of urinary glyphosate with both frailty index and frailty ( P for nonlinearity = 0.853 and 0.568, respectively) (Fig. 2).

## 3.3. Association between urinary glyphosate and all-cause mortality

During a median follow-up of 3.9 years (18,583 person-years, with a

Table 3 Crude and adjusted association of urinary glyphosate with all-cause mortality.

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 3 Crude and adjusted association of urinary glyphosate with all-cause mortality.</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>All-cause mortality</th><th>N</th><th>N events</th><th>Model 1 HR (95% CI)</th><th>Model 2 HR (95% CI)</th><th>Model 3 HR (95% CI)</th></tr><tr><td>Glyphosate (log 2 - transformed)</td><td>4697</td><td>238</td><td>1.43 (1.29, 1.59)***</td><td>1.20 (1.08, 1.33)**</td><td>1.19 (1.07, 1.31)**</td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate (categorical)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Q1</td><td>1175</td><td>24</td><td>Ref.</td><td>Ref.</td><td>Ref.</td></tr><tr><td>Q2</td><td>1177</td><td>51</td><td>1.77 (1.02, 3.09)*</td><td>1.51 (0.87, 2.64)</td><td>1.55 (0.87, 2.76)</td></tr><tr><td>Q3</td><td>1171</td><td>62</td><td>2.18 (1.30, 3.64)**</td><td>1.60 (0.89, 2.85)</td><td>1.69 (0.95, 3.00)</td></tr><tr><td>Q4</td><td>1174</td><td>101</td><td>3.23 (2.12, 4.91)***</td><td>1.86 (1.18, 2.93)**</td><td>1.81 (1.19, 2.76)**</td></tr><tr><td>P for trend</td><td></td><td></td><td>&lt; 0.001</td><td>0.008</td><td>0.005</td></tr></tbody></table>Association between urinary glyphosate and all-cause mortality was analyzed using weighted Cox regression. HR, hazard ratio; CI, confidence interval.

Model 1: unadjusted.

Model 2: adjusted for age, gender and race.

Model 3: adjusted for model 2 plus education level, PIR, hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, smoking, alcohol drinking, psychical activity, eGFR and BMI.

* P &lt; 0.05.

** P &lt; 0.01.

*** P &lt; 0.001.

maximum  follow-up  of  7.0  years),  238  total  deaths  were  recorded. Kaplan-Meier curves with follow-up time as the time-scale demonstrated a higher risk of all-cause mortality among participants with elevated urinary glyphosate levels (9.2 % in Q4 vs. 3.6 % in Q1, P value of logrank  test &lt; 0.001)  (Fig.  3 A ),  and  Kaplan-Meier  curves  with  participants ' age as the time-scale revealed that the risk of death increased with age, especially for participants aged ≥ 60 years (Fig. 3 B ). Subsequently, the multivariable-adjusted Cox regression revealed that urinary glyphosate (log2-transformed) was positively linked to an increased risk of allcause  mortality  (HR = 1.19,  95 %  CI:  1.07 -1.31, P = 0.001).  When stratified  by  quartiles,  the  adjusted  HRs  with  95 %  CIs  for  all-cause mortality relative to Q1 were 1.55 (95 % CI, 0.87 -2.76) for Q2, 1.69 (95 % CI, 0.95 -3.00) for Q3, and 1.81 (95 % CI, 1.19 -2.76) for Q4 ( P for trend = 0.005) in model 3 and also remained consistent in other two models ( P for trend &lt; 0.001 and = 0.008, respectively) (Table 3).

## 3.4. Mediation effects of frailty index on the association between urinary glyphosate and mortality

The causal mediation analysis, illustrated in Fig. 4, indicated that urinary glyphosate contributed to an elevated risk of all-cause death risk partially through increasing the frailty index. Specifically, exposure to glyphosate was correlated with a higher frailty index value, and per 0.1unit increment in frailty index was associated with a 77 % higher risk of all-cause death (adjusted HR = 1.77, 95 % CI: 1.56 -2.01) in the fullyadjusted  model.  A  significant  30.3 %  of  the  total  effect  of  urinary glyphosate on all-cause mortality was through elevated frailty index and remained  consistent  in  model  1  (mediation  proportion:  36.9 %)  and model 2 (33.9 %),  implying  a  partial  mediator  role  of  frailty  in  this association.

## 3.5. Sensitivity analyses

In the first sensitivity analysis without data multiple imputation, the positive  associations  between  urinary  glyphosate  and  frailty  index, frailty (Supplementary Table 3), and all-cause mortality (Supplementary Table 4) did not change, suggesting that multiple imputation did not significantly affect the results. The second sensitivity analysis examined the associations of urinary glyphosate (ng/mL) without UCr correction with frailty and mortality. Linear and logistic regression still demonstrated  positive  associations  between  urinary  glyphosate  and frailty index ( P for trend &lt; 0.001) and frailty prevalence ( P for trend = 0.032) (Supplementary Table 5). Similarly, Cox regression still revealed a  positive  glyphosate-all-cause  mortality  association  ( P for  trend = 0.030) (Supplementary Table 6). In addition, when we excluded participants who died within the first year of follow-up, their associations (Supplementary Table  7 and Supplementary Table 8) remained unchanged.

## 4. Discussion

In this sample of US adults, we examined the association of urinary glyphosate level with frailty defined by a 49-item frailty index and allcause mortality and found that urinary glyphosate was positively associated with frailty and mortality. Frailty also played a partial mediator role in the relationship between urinary glyphosate and death.

To our knowledge, this is the first study exploring the association of urinary glyphosate with frailty as well as all-cause mortality simultaneously in the US general population with the largest sample size to date. Our findings add new and additional evidence of adverse health effects  of  glyphosate  exposure  and,  therefore,  may  have  important public health implications, which suggests that more regulatory actions should be conducted to minimize glyphosate exposure.

Although glyphosate exposure and carcinogenic risk have been reported with controversial conclusions (Guyton et al., 2015; Andreotti et  al.,  2018),  epidemiological  studies  on  the  effects  of  glyphosate exposure on other health outcomes in humans are limited. Currently, no existing epidemiological studies have explored the relationship between glyphosate  exposure  and  frailty,  an  increasingly  important  clinical condition  and  public  concern  especially  against  the  background  of global aging. The prevalence of frailty in the present study was 18.6 %, which  was  similar  to  that  in  other  studies  conducted  in  community settings (Siriwardhana et al., 2018). The lack of relevant epidemiological research on glyphosate exposure and frailty makes direct comparisons of our findings with other studies challenging. Using a nationwide cohort analysis, our study uncovered for the first time the adverse effects of glyphosate on frailty. In addition, the positive association between urinary glyphosate and death observed in this study was consistent with previous case reports (Cho et al., 2019) and other studies (Moon et al., 2018; Untalan et al., 2024), but our sample size was larger and weighted statistics were used to produce more accurate estimates.

The exact biological mechanisms underlying the glyphosate exposure and frailty relationship remain poorly understood, but several explanations may involve. First, studies have identified glyphosate as a contributor  to  reduced  grip  strength  in  adults  (Jauregui-Zunzunegui et al., 2024), and decreased grip strength is recognized to associate with frailty. Second, studies in vitro and on animal models have revealed that glyphosate can activate oxidative stress, DNA damage, inflammation, lipid peroxidation, and also impair antioxidant activities (Wang et al., 2022), while oxidative  stress  and  frailty  are  intrinsically  and  closely linked. Third, glyphosate exposure is associated with significant hormonal  disturbance  (Geier  and  Geier,  2023),  such  as  reduced  total estradiol and testosterone, and there is evidence that such hormonal changes positively contribute to frailty (Cawthon et al., 2009). Fourth, glyphosate exposure has been linked to cognitive declines in older adults (Ren et al., 2024). Since cognitive impairment is often associated with frailty, this may serve as another pathway connecting glyphosate with frailty and warrants further investigations.

Furthermore, our study also revealed a positive association between frailty index and all-cause mortality, which was consistent with previous abundant studies (Kojima et al., 2018). However, this study introduced a mediating  role  of  frailty  index,  shedding  light  on  how  glyphosate exposure might influence mortality risk through its impact on frailty.

The present study has several strengths. First, this study is the first and largest investigation to date to evaluate the relationship between urinary glyphosate and frailty prevalence and all-cause mortality risk in

Fig. 4. Mediation analysis illustrating the role of frailty index in the relationship between urinary glyphosate and all-cause mortality. Panel A -C represent results adjusting for model 1 -3, respectively. The mediation proportion was calculated using the VanderWeele method.

<!-- image -->

adults, and the mediating role of frailty was first mentioned. Second, adequate  sample  size  and  weighted  statistical  analysis  enhanced  the generalizability of these findings. Nonetheless, some limitations should also be acknowledged. First, urinary glyphosate level reflects only recent exposure given its short half-life in humans and thus does not capture long-term  or  cumulative  exposure  (Ospina  et  al.,  2022).  Second, NHANES does not provide data on aminomethylphosphonic acid, the primary environmental degradation product of glyphosate. Third, the variables used to calculate frailty index included several self-reported comorbidities  and  questionnaires,  which  might  introduce  recall  bias and  misclassification.  Fourth,  the  observational  design  of  this  study limited the ability to establish causation.

## 5. Conclusions

Urinary glyphosate was positively and linearly associated with frailty and all-cause mortality in US general adults. Frailty emerged as a significant mediator in the association between urinary glyphosate and allcause death, accounting for 30.3 % of the total effect. These findings underscore the need for stricter measures and preventive strategies to minimize exposure to glyphosate.

## Funding

This work was supported by the Natural Science Youth Foundation of Jiangsu  Province  of  China  (Grant  no.  BK20241110,  Sibo  Wang),  the Jiangsu Funding Program for Excellent Postdoctoral Talent (Sibo Wang), the Postdoctoral Foundation of Jiangsu Province Hospital (Sibo Wang), and  the  National  Natural  Science  Foundation  of  China  (Grant  no. 82070367, Liansheng Wang).

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

Tongtong Yang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing - original draft, Visualization. Liuhua Zhou: Conceptualization, Methodology,  Writing  -  review &amp; editing,  Visualization. Peng  Jing: Writing - review &amp; editing, Data curation, Validation. Yulin Bao: Software, Writing - review &amp; editing. Lingfeng Gu: Data curation, Writing review &amp; editing. Yixi Chen: Data curation, Writing - review &amp; editing. Xinying Shi: Data curation, Writing - review &amp; editing. Hao Wang: Writing - review &amp; editing. Liansheng Wang: Conceptualization, Project administration, Writing - review &amp; editing. Sibo Wang: Conceptualization,  Project  administration,  Supervision,  Writing  -  review &amp;

## editing.

## Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgments

We sincerely  thank  all  the  participants  and  NCHS  team  for  their dedicated contributions to the publicly available data.

## Appendix A. Supporting information

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.ecoenv.2025.118096.

## Data availability

The  dataset  utilized  in  this  study  can  be  accessed  through  the NHANES website: https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/ContinuousNhanes/Default.aspx.

## References

- ADA, 2024. 2. Diagnosis and classification of diabetes: standards of care in diabetes2024. Diabetes Care 47 (1). S20-S42.
- Andreotti, G., Koutros, S., Hofmann, J.N., Sandler, D.P., Lubin, J.H., Lynch, C.F., et al., 2018. Glyphosate use and cancer incidence in the agricultural health study. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 110 (5), 509 -516.
- Bao, W., Liu, B., Rong, S., Dai, S.Y., Trasande, L., Lehmler, H.J., 2020. Association between bisphenol a exposure and risk of all-cause and cause-specific mortality in US adults. JAMA Netw. Open 3 (8), e2011620.
- Barr, D.B., Wilder, L.C., Caudill, S.P., Gonzalez, A.J., Needham, L.L., Pirkle, J.L., 2005. Urinary creatinine concentrations in the U.S. population: implications for urinary biologic monitoring measurements. Environ. Health Perspect. 113 (2), 192 -200.
- Camacho, A., Mejia, D., 2017. The health consequences of aerial spraying illicit crops: the case of Colombia. J. Health Econ. 54, 147 -160.
- Cawthon, P.M., Ensrud, K.E., Laughlin, G.A., Cauley, J.A., Dam, T.T., Barrett-Connor, E., et al., 2009. Sex hormones and frailty in older men: the osteoporotic fractures in men (MrOS) study. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 94 (10), 3806 -3815.
- Chen, T.C., Clark, J., Riddles, M.K., Mohadjer, L.K., Fakhouri, T.H.I., 2020. National health and nutrition examination survey, 2015 -2018: sample design and estimation procedures. Vital Health Stat. 2 (184), 1 -35.
- Chen, C., Winterstein, A.G., Fillingim, R.B., Wei, Y.J., 2019. Body weight, frailty, and chronic pain in older adults: a cross-sectional study. BMC Geriatr. 19 (1), 143.
- Cho, Y.S., Moon, J.M., Chun, B.J., Lee, B.K., 2019. Use of qSOFA score in predicting the outcomes of patients with glyphosate surfactant herbicide poisoning immediately upon arrival at the emergency department. Shock 51 (4), 447 -452.
- de Morais Valentim, J.M.B., Coradi, C., Viana, N.P., Fagundes, T.R., Micheletti, P.L., Gaboardi, S.C., et al., 2024. Glyphosate as a food contaminant: main sources, detection levels, and implications for human and public health. Foods 13 (11).
- Dent, E., Martin, F.C., Bergman, H., Woo, J., Romero-Ortuno, R., Walston, J.D., 2019. Management of frailty: opportunities, challenges, and future directions. Lancet 394 (10206), 1376 -1386.
- Fried, L.P., Tangen, C.M., Walston, J., Newman, A.B., Hirsch, C., Gottdiener, J., et al., 2001. Frailty in older adults: evidence for a phenotype. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 56 (3), M146 -156.
- Geier, D.A., Geier, M.R., 2023. Urine glyphosate exposure and serum sex hormone disruption within the 2013 -2014 National Health and Nutrition Examination survey (NHANES). Chemosphere 316, 137796.
- Guyton, K.Z., Loomis, D., Grosse, Y., El Ghissassi, F., Benbrahim-Tallaa, L., Guha, N., et al., 2015. Carcinogenicity of tetrachlorvinphos, parathion, malathion, diazinon, and glyphosate. Lancet Oncol. 16 (5), 490 -491.
- Hakeem, F.F., Bernabe, E., Sabbah, W., 2021. Association between oral health and frailty among american older adults. J. Am. Med. Dir. Assoc. 22 (3), 559 -563 e552.
- Han, K., Gao, L., Xu, H., Li, J., Han, L., Shen, J., et al., 2024. Analysis of the association between urinary glyphosate exposure and fatty liver index: a study for US adults. BMC Public Health 24 (1), 703.
- Hoogendijk, E.O., Afilalo, J., Ensrud, K.E., Kowal, P., Onder, G., Fried, L.P., 2019. Frailty: implications for clinical practice and public health. Lancet 394 (10206), 1365 -1375.
- Hoppin, J.A., Umbach, D.M., Long, S., London, S.J., Henneberger, P.K., Blair, A., et al., 2017. Pesticides are associated with allergic and non-allergic wheeze among male farmers. Environ. Health Perspect. 125 (4), 535 -543.
- Jaskulski, S., Jung, A.Y., Behrens, S., Johnson, T., Kaaks, R., Thone, K., et al., 2018. Circulating enterolactone concentrations and prognosis of postmenopausal breast cancer: assessment of mediation by inflammatory markers. Int. J. Cancer 143 (11), 2698 -2708.
- Jauregui-Zunzunegui, S., Rodriguez-Artalejo, F., Tellez-Plaza, M., Garcia-Esquinas, E., 2024. Glyphosate exposure, muscular health and functional limitations in middleaged and older adults. Environ. Res. 251 (Pt 1), 118547.
- Johnson, C.L., Dohrmann, S.M., Burt, V.L., Mohadjer, L.K., 2014. National health and nutrition examination survey: sample design, 2011 -2014. Vital Health Stat. 2 (162), 1 -33.
- Kojima, G., Iliffe, S., Walters, K., 2018. Frailty index as a predictor of mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Age Ageing 47 (2), 193 -200.
- Levey, A.S., Stevens, L.A., Schmid, C.H., Zhang, Y.L., Castro III, A.F., Feldman, H.I., et al., 2009. A new equation to estimate glomerular filtration rate. Ann. Intern. Med. 150 (9), 604 -612.
- Li, W., Lei, D., Huang, G., Tang, N., Lu, P., Jiang, L., et al., 2023. Association of glyphosate exposure with multiple adverse outcomes and potential mediators. Chemosphere 345, 140477.
- Luo, W., Lu, T., Li, F., Qian, C., Zhang, L., Sun, M., et al., 2019. Surgical treatment of pyloric stenosis caused by glyphosate poisoning: a case report. Medicine 98 (30), e16590.
- Meftaul, I.M., Venkateswarlu, K., Dharmarajan, R., Annamalai, P., Asaduzzaman, M., Parven, A., et al., 2020. Controversies over human health and ecological impacts of glyphosate: is it to be banned in modern agriculture? Environ. Pollut. 263 (Pt A), 114372.
- Moon, J.M., Chun, B.J., Cho, Y.S., Lee, S.D., Hong, Y.J., Shin, M.H., et al., 2018. Cardiovascular effects and fatality may differ according to the formulation of glyphosate salt herbicide. Cardiovasc. Toxicol. 18 (1), 99 -107.
- Myers, J.P., Antoniou, M.N., Blumberg, B., Carroll, L., Colborn, T., Everett, L.G., et al., 2016. Concerns over use of glyphosate-based herbicides and risks associated with exposures: a consensus statement. Environ. Health 15, 19.
- Ofori-Asenso, R., Chin, K.L., Mazidi, M., Zomer, E., Ilomaki, J., Zullo, A.R., et al., 2019. Global incidence of frailty and prefrailty among community-dwelling older adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Netw. Open 2 (8), e198398.
- Ospina, M., Schutze, A., Morales-Agudelo, P., Vidal, M., Wong, L.Y., Calafat, A.M., 2022. Exposure to glyphosate in the United States: data from the 2013 -2014 national health and nutrition examination survey. Environ. Int 170, 107620.
- Piercy, K.L., Troiano, R.P., Ballard, R.M., Carlson, S.A., Fulton, J.E., Galuska, D.A., et al., 2018. The physical activity guidelines for Americans. JAMA 320 (19), 2020 -2028.
- Qiu, Z., Chen, X., Geng, T., Wan, Z., Lu, Q., Li, L., et al., 2022. Associations of serum carotenoids with risk of cardiovascular mortality among individuals with type 2 diabetes: results from NHANES. Diabetes Care.
- Ren, J., Yu, Y., Wang, Y., Dong, Y., Shen, X., 2024. Association BEtween Urinary Glyphosate Exposure and Cognitive Impairment in Older Adults from NHANES 2013 to 2014. J. Alzheimers Dis. 97 (2), 609 -620.
- Schutze, A., Morales-Agudelo, P., Vidal, M., Calafat, A.M., Ospina, M., 2021. Quantification of glyphosate and other organophosphorus compounds in human urine via ion chromatography isotope dilution tandem mass spectrometry. Chemosphere 274, 129427.
- Searle, S.D., Mitnitski, A., Gahbauer, E.A., Gill, T.M., Rockwood, K., 2008. A standard procedure for creating a frailty index. BMC Geriatr. 8, 24.
- Shrestha, S., Parks, C.G., Goldner, W.S., Kamel, F., Umbach, D.M., Ward, M.H., et al., 2018. Pesticide use and incident hypothyroidism in pesticide applicators in the agricultural health study. Environ. Health Perspect. 126 (9), 97008.
- Siriwardhana, D.D., Hardoon, S., Rait, G., Weerasinghe, M.C., Walters, K.R., 2018. Prevalence of frailty and prefrailty among community-dwelling older adults in lowincome and middle-income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open 8 (3), e018195.
- Untalan, M., Ivic-Pavlicic, T., Taioli, E., 2024. Urinary glyphosate levels and association with mortality in the 2013 -16 national health and nutrition examination survey. Carcinogenesis 45 (3), 163 -169.
- VanderWeele, T.J., 2011. Causal mediation analysis with survival data. Epidemiology 22 (4), 582 -585.
- Wang, X., Lu, Q., Guo, J., Ares, I., Martinez, M., Martinez-Larranaga, M.R., et al., 2022. Oxidative stress and metabolism: a mechanistic insight for glyphosate toxicology. Annu. Rev. Pharm. Toxicol. 62, 617 -639.
- Williams, B., Mancia, G., Spiering, W., Agabiti Rosei, E., Azizi, M., Burnier, M., et al., 2018. 2018 ESC/ESH guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension. Eur. Heart J. 39 (33), 3021 -3104.
- Xu, C., Weng, Z., Zhang, L., Xu, J., Dahal, M., Basnet, T.B., et al., 2021. HDL cholesterol: a potential mediator of the association between urinary cadmium concentration and cardiovascular disease risk. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 208, 111433.
- Zhang, Z., 2016. Multiple imputation with multivariate imputation by chained equation (MICE) package. Ann. Transl. Med. 4 (2), 30.