<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijheh

## Carbaryl use and incident cancer in the Agricultural Health Study: an updated analysis

<!-- image -->

Patricia A. Erickson a,d,1 , Gabriella Andreotti a , Richard V. Remigio a , Mary H. Ward a , Christine G. Parks b , Dale P. Sandler b , Paul S. Albert c , Kathryn Hughes Barry d,e , Jonathan N. Hofmann a , Laura E. Beane Freeman a,*

a Occupational and Environmental Epidemiology Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA

- b Epidemiology Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Durham, NC, USA
- c Biostatistics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA
- d Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
- e Program in Oncology, University of Maryland Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD, USA

## A R T I C L E  I N F O

Keywords: Cancer Carbaryl Pesticides Agriculture

Occupational exposure

## 1. Introduction

Carbaryl is a N-methyl carbamate insecticide and acts as an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor (United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2008); exposure can lead to an accumulation of acetylcholine in the  synaptic  cleft,  resulting  in  neurotoxic  effects  (Abreu-Villaça  and Levin, 2017). It was first registered for use on cotton crops (United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2008), but remains widely used in the  United  States  (US)  with  registrations  for  both  agricultural  and

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: freemala@mail.nih.gov (L.E. Beane Freeman).

1 Current Address: Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, UT.

## A B S T R A C T

Carbaryl is a common carbamate insecticide in the United States (USA). Previous epidemiologic investigations, including within the Agricultural Health Study (AHS), have suggested potential associations between carbaryl use and cancer risk. The AHS is a prospective cohort study of licensed pesticide applicators in North Carolina (NC) and Iowa (IA), USA. Information on lifetime pesticide use was reported at enrollment (1993 -1997) and follow-up (1999 -2005). We evaluated cancer risks associated with ever- and intensity-weighted lifetime days (IWLD) of carbaryl use. Among 52,625 applicators, 8713 incident cancer cases were identified from linkages with state cancer registries through 2014 (NC) or 2017 (IA). We used Poisson regression to estimate rate ratios (RR) and 95 % confidence intervals (CI), controlling for confounders, and evaluated lagged exposures. Approximately 51 % of applicators reported using carbaryl. Increasing IWLD of carbaryl use was associated with increased stomach cancer risk (third tertile vs. never use; RRT3 = 2.07, 95 % CI: 1.05 -4.07 , p-trend = 0.02), persisting when exposure was lagged by 5-years (RRT3 = 2.20, 95 % CI: 1.12 -4.33). We noted elevated risks of esophageal (RR = 1.52, 95 % CI: 1.01 -2.27) and tongue (RR = 1.91, 95 % CI: 0.95 -3.81) cancers with ever-use. There was an increased risk of aggressive prostate cancer when carbaryl exposure was lagged by 30 years (RRlag30Q4 = 1.56, 95 % CI: 1.18 -2.08, p-trend = 0.002). This is the largest and most comprehensive prospective evaluation of carbaryl  and cancer risk to date. We provide novel evidence of associations between carbaryl exposure and specific cancers. There is a need for additional studies to confirm these findings and to elucidate the biological mechanisms underlying the observed associations.

residential uses, including applications to fruits, vegetables, grains, and lawn and garden care (United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2008). Based on the most recent usage information for the US, more than 700,000 pounds of carbaryl were applied agriculturally each year between 2013 and 2017, while more than 2 million pounds were applied in non-agricultural settings (including applications to buildings, turf, pastures, and roadways) (United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2020). Carbaryl continues to be used in Canada and Australia, though with more limited use than the United States (Australian Government,

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

2024; Health Canada, 2016). The European Union banned all uses of carbaryl in 2006, in part because of concerns for ' potential carcinogenic properties of the active substance ' (Euopean Comission, 2007).

Carbaryl was reviewed by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) in 1987, when it was categorized as a group 3 carcinogen or ' not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity in humans ' ,  as  based  on insufficient  data  from  human  studies  and  inadequate  evidence  from experimental  studies  (IARC,  1987).  In  2004,  the  US  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) classified carbaryl as ' likely to be carcinogenic in  humans, ' based  primarily  on  experimental  studies  that  observed hemangiosarcoma  in  mice  (United  States  Environmental  Protection Agency, 2008, 2021). The most recent US EPA ' s  Human Health Risk Assessment  raised  concern  for  mutagenic  effects  based  on in-vitro studies,  in  which  carbaryl  produced  chromosomal  aberrations  and affected  mitosis  (United  States  Environmental  Protection  Agency, 2021). Other in-vitro studies have suggested carbaryl may be genotoxic and may act as an endocrine disruptor by activating estrogen receptors ( ¨ Onfelt and Klasterska, 1984; Tange et al., 2016; United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2021). These properties of carbaryl make up several of the key characteristics of carcinogens identified by IARC in their hazard identification of potential carcinogens (Smith et al., 2016). Additionally, carbaryl is a known nitrosatable pesticide, as it is able to form N-nitroso carbaryl in the presence of nitrosating agents derived from  ingested  nitrate  and  nitrite  (IARC,  1983).  Several  nitrosatable compounds (NOC), including carbaryl, have been shown to be carcinogenic  in  experimental  studies  (IARC,  1983)  and  NOCs  have  been associated with an increased risk of several cancers (IARC, 2010; Ward et al., 2018).

Previous epidemiologic studies, though limited, provide some evidence of an association between carbaryl and increased risk of specific cancers. For example, a 2007 evaluation of carbaryl and incident cancer in the Agricultural Health Study (AHS) observed an increased risk of melanoma, as did a later evaluation in the AHS (Dennis et al., 2010; Mahajan et al., 2007). Additionally, an evaluation from the agricultural cohort AGRICAN reported an increased risk of central nervous system tumors (e.g., gliomas) (Piel et al., 2019). However, for other cancer sites, such as non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL), results have been inconsistent and conflicting (Alavanja et al., 2014; De Roos et al., 2021; Koutros et al., 2019; Leon et al., 2019).

In this study, we updated the 2007 evaluation of carbaryl use and incident  cancer  in  the  AHS.  Our  analysis  included  a  total  of  4,629 incident carbaryl-exposed cancer cases, with an additional 3,338 incident exposed cases, almost 14 additional years of follow-up, and updated  exposure  information  as  compared  to  the  previous  evaluation (Mahajan et al., 2007).

## 2. Methods

## 2.1. Study population

The AHS is a prospective cohort study of private and commercial pesticide applicators and their spouses in Iowa (IA) and North Carolina (NC) (Alavanja et al., 1996). The AHS has been described previously; briefly,  57,310  applicators  seeking  a  license  to  apply  restricted-use pesticides  were  enrolled  between  1993  and  1997  (Alavanja  et  al., 1996). The study was approved by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Special Studies Institutional Review Board (IRB) and the IRBs of other participating institutions. All participants implied consent by completing the enrollment questionnaire, consistent with IRB rules in effect at the time.

## 2.2. Exposure assessment

At enrollment, all pesticide applicators completed a selfadministered questionnaire that collected information on demographics, personal and family medical history, and detailed pesticide use information, including lifetime use of carbaryl and 49 other pesticides. For 22 of these pesticides, applicators reported additional details related to application practices and history (i.e., years and days/year of personal pesticide mixing or application) for 22 of these pesticides. For the remaining 28 pesticides, including carbaryl, this detailed information was collected from a take-home questionnaire (also administered at enrollment), which was completed by 44 % of applicators. In a follow-up interview  administered  from  1999  to  2005,  updated  exposure  information,  including  frequency,  duration,  and  other  factors  related  to exposure (such as use of personal protective equipment and the application method) was collected from approximately 67 % of the enrolled pesticide applicators. Questionnaires are available at https://aghealth. nih.gov/collaboration/questionnaires.html.  For  participants  who  did not  complete  the  follow-up  interview,  missing  exposure  data  was imputed using data-driven multiple imputation, which has been previously described (Heltshe et al., 2012). Briefly, logistic regression and stratified sampling were used to impute pesticide exposures based on a number of variables from the enrollment questionnaire. The final model included demographic variables, farm characteristics, such as whether the applicator was a farm owner and the size of the farm, factors associated with pesticide use (including duration and frequency, application methods, applicator type, the use of personal protective equipment), whether crops or animals were raised in the last 12 months, and history of specific medical conditions (Heltshe et al., 2012). Prior analyses have shown that this imputation method yields similar cancer risk estimates for  participants  with  complete  follow-up  data  and  those  with  both complete and imputed data (Andreotti et al., 2019).

Based on this information, three exposure metrics were defined: (1) ever vs. never use, (2) cumulative lifetime exposure days, calculated as the number of days used per year multiplied by number of years used, and (3) intensity-weighted lifetime days, calculated as cumulative lifetime  days  multiplied  by  an  intensity  score.  The  intensity  score,  or weighting factor, is based on a previously derived algorithm that integrates  both  literature-based  evidence  and  information  provided  by pesticide applicators. This included details such as whether the applicator mixed or applied pesticides, repaired pesticide-related equipment, and used personal protective equipment. The initial weighting factors were informed by literature on the relative contribution of these activities to pesticide exposures (Dosemeci, 2002). These weights were subsequently refined using field studies within the AHS (Hines et al., 2007, 2008; Thomas et al., 2010), leading to the updated the intensity-weighting algorithm used in this analysis (Coble et al., 2011).

## 2.3. Case ascertainment and classification

Participant vital status was obtained from the National Death Index while incident cancer cases were ascertained from regular linkages to population-based cancer registries in Iowa and North Carolina. Cancer sites  were  classified  according  to  the  International  Classification  of Diseases for Oncology, 3rd Revision (ICD-O-3) (Fritz et al., 2013). The Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program Lymphoma Subtype Recodes (2008) was used for classification of subtypes of lymphoid neoplasms (http://seer.cancer.gov/lymphomarecode/lymphoma-orig. html).  Additionally,  for  this  analysis,  we  defined  aggressive  prostate cancer as having one or more of the following characteristics: Gleason score of ≥ 8, poorly differentiated, a diagnosed grade or stage at or above 3, or fatal (i.e., underlying cause of death was prostate cancer).

## 2.4. Statistical methods and analyses

For our evaluation, we excluded participants who, at enrollment, had a history of cancer (other than non-melanoma skin cancer; n = 1,096), did not live in IA or NC at enrollment (n = 341), or were missing information on carbaryl use (n = 3,248), leaving n = 52,625 applicators and n = 8,713 total cancer cases for our analysis.

This analysis incorporates time-varying covariates, including

Table 1 Select characteristics of Agricultural Health Study population by carbaryl exposure status from enrollment questionnaire data (1993 -1997).

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 1 Select characteristics of Agricultural Health Study population by carbaryl exposure status from enrollment questionnaire data (1993 -1997).</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Characteristics b</th><th>Overall</th><th>Unexposed a</th><th>Exposed a</th><th>p-value</th></tr><tr><td></td><th>N, %</th><th>N, %</th><th>N, %</th><td></td></tr><tr><th>Total</th><td>52,625 (100)</td><td>26,046 (49.5)</td><td>26,579 (50.5)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Attained Age (mean, SD)</th><td>65 (12)</td><td>63.7 (12.2)</td><td>66.2 (11.8)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Incident Cancer Cases</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>43,912 (83.4)</td><td>21,962 (84.4)</td><td>21,950 (82.5)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>8713 (16.6)</td><td>4084 (15.7)</td><td>4629 (17.4)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Race</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>White</th><td>50,913 (96.7)</td><td>25,179 (96.8)</td><td>25,734 (96.7)</td><td>0.09</td></tr><tr><th>Black and Other</th><td>1143 (2.2)</td><td>598 (2.3)</td><td>545 (2.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Missing</th><td>569 (1.1)</td><td>269 (1.0)</td><td>300 (1.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Sex</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Male</th><td>51,226 (97.3)</td><td>25,481 (97.9)</td><td>25,745 (96.8)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Female</th><td>1399 (2.7)</td><td>565 (2.2)</td><td>834 (3.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>State of Residence</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Iowa</th><td>34,898 (66.3)</td><td>21,790 (83.7)</td><td>13,108 (49.3)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>North Carolina</th><td>17,727 (33.7)</td><td>4256 (16.4)</td><td>13,471 (50.6)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Applicator Type</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Private</th><td>48,013 (91.2)</td><td>2,3297 (89.5)</td><td>24,716 (92.9)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Commercial</th><td>4612 (8.8)</td><td>2749 (10.6)</td><td>1863 (7.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Smoking Status &amp; Packyears</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Never</th><td>27,603 (52.5)</td><td>14,956 (57.5)</td><td>12,647 (47.5)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Former, Tertile 1 ( &lt; 3.75)</th><td>5196 (9.9)</td><td>2514 (9.7)</td><td>2682 (10.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Former, Tertile 2 (3.75 - ≤ 15)</th><td>4694 (8.9)</td><td>2044 (7.9)</td><td>2650 (10.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Former, Tertile 3 ( &gt; 15)</th><td>4384 (8.3)</td><td>1619 (6.2)</td><td>2765 (10.4)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Current, Tertile 1 ( &lt; 3.75)</th><td>2955 (5.6)</td><td>1597 (6.1)</td><td>1358 (5.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Current, Tertile 2 (3.75 - ≤ 15)</th><td>2709 (5.1)</td><td>1243 (4.8)</td><td>1466 (5.5)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Current, Tertile 3 ( &gt; 15)</th><td>2783 (5.3)</td><td>1098 (4.2)</td><td>1685 (6.3)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Missing</th><td>2301 (4.4)</td><td>975 (3.7)</td><td>1326 (5.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Education Level</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>High School or less</th><td>28,661 (54.5)</td><td>15,107 (58.1)</td><td>13,554 (50.9)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Beyond high school</th><td>22,174 (42.1)</td><td>10,136 (39)</td><td>12,038 (45.2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Other Education</th><td>119 (0.2)</td><td>63 (0.2)</td><td>56 (0.2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Missing</th><td>1671 (3.2)</td><td>740 (2.8)</td><td>931 (3.5)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Family History of Cancer</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>29,875 (56.8)</td><td>15,635 (60.1)</td><td>14,240 (53.5)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>20,665 (39.3)</td><td>9521 (36.6)</td><td>11,144 (41.9)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Missing</th><td>2085 (4)</td><td>890 (3.4)</td><td>1195 (4.5)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Body Mass Index (kg/m 2 )</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&lt; 25</th><td>10,139 (19.3)</td><td>5090 (19.6)</td><td>5049 (19.0)</td><td>0.005</td></tr><tr><th>25- &lt; 30</th><td>19,577 (37.2)</td><td>9802 (37.7)</td><td>9775 (36.7)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>30 +</th><td>9026 (17.2)</td><td>4451 (17.1)</td><td>4575 (17.2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Missing</th><td>13,883 (26.4)</td><td>6703 (25.8)</td><td>7180 (27.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Alcohol Consumption</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Never</th><td>16,2,84 (30.9)</td><td>6541 (25.1)</td><td>9743 (36.6)</td><td>&lt; 0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Ever</th><td>34,688 (65.9)</td><td>18,652 (71.7)</td><td>16,036 (60.3)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Missing</th><td>1653 (3.1)</td><td>827 (3.2)</td><td>826 (3.1)</td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>a Carbaryl exposure information from enrollment and follow-up questionnaires.

b Demographic information from enrollment questionnaire.

cumulative exposure, calendar year of follow-up, and attained age from cohort participants. These time-dependent covariates were considered constant  over  fixed  2-year  intervals  from  enrollment  until  a  cancer diagnosis, death, movement out of state of end of follow-up period (IA: December 31, 2017; NC: December 31, 2014), whichever occurred first. We  estimated  person-time  within  each  interval,  calculating  timedependent covariate values at the start of each interval, which were incorporated into Poisson regression models . We used Poisson regression to estimate incidence rate ratios (RR) and 95 % confidence intervals (CI) for each category of carbaryl use. In exposure-response analyses, the Wald test was used to estimate linear trends ( p -trend) using the median of  each exposure category as a continuous variable. The PROC MIANALYZE procedure was used to obtain the appropriate variance for the imputed exposure data.

Based on the distribution of exposure among all cancer cases, we categorized  cumulative  lifetime  days  and  intensity-weighted  lifetime days of carbaryl exposure into quartiles, tertiles, or the median, such that there were at least 5 exposed cases per category. For each analysis, the referent group comprised those who reported no use of carbaryl. To address issues related to cancer latency, we evaluated lagged exposures in 5-year intervals, excluding the most recent years of exposure (ranging from 5 to 30 years), prior to cancer diagnosis or other censoring event (death, relocation, or end of follow-up).

All  models  were  adjusted  for  attained  age  (continuous),  state  of residence  (IA  or  NC),  applicator  type  (private  or  commercial),  race (White, Black and Other, missing), sex (male or female), education (high school  or  less,  beyond  high  school,  other  education,  missing),  and cigarette smoking status and pack-years (never, former/pack-years tertiles 1 -3, current pack-years tertile 1 -3, missing). For some cancer sites, adjustments  for  specific  variables  were  not  included  due  to  model convergence issues, which resulted primarily from small sample sizes in certain  strata.  These  limitations  made  reliable  parameter  estimation difficult,  and  therefore,  we  excluded  those  adjustments  to  maintain model stability. For several cancer sites, we performed sensitivity analyses in which we considered potential site-specific confounders (i.e., melanoma: sun exposure, esophageal cancer: alcohol consumption and other tobacco products, thyroid cancer: family history, body mass index (BMI) and we evaluated effect modification by factors that may increase

Table 2 Adjusted Rate Ratios and 95 % Confidence Intervals for Ever vs. Never Use of Carbaryl and Select Cancer Sites among AHS Applicators.

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 2 Adjusted Rate Ratios and 95 % Confidence Intervals for Ever vs. Never Use of Carbaryl and Select Cancer Sites among AHS Applicators.</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Cancer Site a</th><th>Exposed Cases</th><th>Unexposed Cases</th><th>RR (95 % CI)</th></tr><tr><th>All cancers combined</th><td>4629</td><td>4084</td><td>0.98 (0.94,1.03)</td></tr><tr><th>Oral Cavity</th><td>111</td><td>108</td><td>0.99 (0.74,1.33)</td></tr><tr><th>Lip b</th><td>32</td><td>38</td><td>0.89 (0.53,1.50)</td></tr><tr><th>Tongue c</th><td>24</td><td>14</td><td>1.91 (0.95,3.81)</td></tr><tr><th>Pharynx</th><td>26</td><td>28</td><td>0.73 (0.41,1.32)</td></tr><tr><th>Esophagus</th><td>72</td><td>48</td><td>1.52 (1.01,2.27)</td></tr><tr><th>Stomach b</th><td>66</td><td>50</td><td>1.13 (0.75,1.82)</td></tr><tr><th>Small Intestine b</th><td>25</td><td>27</td><td>1.02 (0.57,1.84)</td></tr><tr><th>Colon</th><td>297</td><td>292</td><td>0.88 (0.73,1.05)</td></tr><tr><th>Rectum</th><td>136</td><td>127</td><td>0.93 (0.70,1.22)</td></tr><tr><th>Liver b</th><td>38</td><td>24</td><td>1.01 (0.56,1.80)</td></tr><tr><th>Gall &amp; Biliary d</th><td>18</td><td>18</td><td>0.82 (0.40,1.69)</td></tr><tr><th>Pancreas</th><td>105</td><td>92</td><td>0.95 (0.70,1.30)</td></tr><tr><th>Larynx b</th><td>45</td><td>32</td><td>1.25 (0.77,2.05)</td></tr><tr><th>Lung</th><td>457</td><td>330</td><td>0.83 (0.70,0.97)</td></tr><tr><th>Melanoma</th><td>236</td><td>196</td><td>1.13 (0.92,1.40)</td></tr><tr><th>Prostate e</th><td>1773</td><td>1582</td><td>1.04 (0.96,1.12)</td></tr><tr><th>Aggressive Prostate e,f</th><td>384</td><td>347</td><td>0.99 (0.88,1.11)</td></tr><tr><th>Testis e</th><td>21</td><td>31</td><td>0.85 (0.46,1.57)</td></tr><tr><th>Kidney</th><td>167</td><td>154</td><td>0.93 (0.72,1.19)</td></tr><tr><th>Bladder</th><td>233</td><td>204</td><td>0.90 (0.73,1.11)</td></tr><tr><th>Brain d</th><td>44</td><td>53</td><td>0.88 (0.57,1.37)</td></tr><tr><th>Thyroid</th><td>31</td><td>61</td><td>0.49 (0.30,0.78)</td></tr><tr><th>Hodgkin Lymphoma g</th><td>13</td><td>20</td><td>0.87 (0.41,1.84)</td></tr><tr><th>NHL</th><td>371</td><td>356</td><td>0.96 (0.82,1.13)</td></tr><tr><th>NHL, B-Cell</th><td>347</td><td>325</td><td>0.98 (0.83,1.16)</td></tr><tr><th>CLL/SLL</th><td>84</td><td>80</td><td>1.09 (0.77,1.53)</td></tr><tr><th>Follicular</th><td>48</td><td>39</td><td>1.21 (0.76,1.91)</td></tr><tr><th>Lymphoma</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>NHL, T-cell b</th><td>12</td><td>21</td><td>0.63 (0.29,1.36)</td></tr><tr><th>Leukemia</th><td>76</td><td>52</td><td>1.10 (0.74,1.64)</td></tr><tr><th>Myeloid Leukemia</th><td>62</td><td>45</td><td>1.06 (0.69,1.62)</td></tr></tbody></table>Note: RR, Risk Ratio. 95 % CI, 95 % Confidence Interval. NHL, Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma.  CLL/SLL,  Chronic  Lymphocytic  Leukemia/Small  Lymphocytic Leukemia.

a Unless  otherwise  noted,  models  were  adjusted  for  attained  age,  state  of residence, sex, race, education, smoking status (never, formerT1-T3, currentT1T3), and applicator type. Other models excluded specific variables to preserve stability due to model convergence.

b Adjusted for attained age, state of residence, race, education, smoking status (never, former T1-T3, currentT1-T3), and applicator type.

c Adjusted  for  attained  age,  state  of  residence,  education,  smoking  status (never, former T1-T3, currentT1-T3), and applicator type.

d Adjusted for attained age, state of residence, sex, education, smoking status (never, former T1-T3, currentT1-T3), and applicator type.

e Male applicators only.

f Aggressive  prostate  cancer  defined  as:  total  Gleason  score  of  8,  poorly differentiated, a diagnosed grade or stage at or above 3, or fatal (i.e., underlying cause of death was prostate cancer).

g Adjusted  for  attained  age,  state  of  residence,  smoking  status  (never, formerT1-T3, current T1-T3), and applicator type.

risk among specific subgroups of the population (i.e., stomach cancer: drinking water nitrate exposures). We also examined the potential for confounding from the pesticides most highly correlated with carbaryl as based on continuous IWLD, Pearson correlation coefficients were ≥ 0.30 for  carbaryl  and  malathion,  diazinon,  pendimethalin,  chlorimuronethyl, metribuzin, and chlordane. The inclusion of these pesticides did not substantially change ( ≤ 10 %) the risk estimates and therefore they were not included in any of the final models.

All analyses were conducted with SAS version 9.4 (Cary, NC). All tests were two-sided and considered to be statistically significant at an alpha of 0.05.

## 3. Results

Among  52,625  participants,  26,579  (51  %)  reported  ever-use  of carbaryl (Table 1). This cohort had a mean attained age of 65 years; most participants were male (97 %), white (97 %), private applicators (91 %), and from IA (66 %). Applicators reporting use of carbaryl were older than non-users and more likely to be from NC. A total of 8,713 incident cancers were diagnosed, of which 4,629 were among carbaryl users. The median value of lifetime days of carbaryl use was 25, whereas the median value for intensity-weighted lifetime days was 992. The cancer sites with the greatest numbers of exposed cases, as based on ever use, were prostate cancer (n = 1,773), lung (n = 457), non-Hodgkin lymphoma (n = 371), and colon cancer (n = 297).

Overall, there was no association between all cancers combined and either ever-use (RR = 0.98, 95 % CI: 0.94 -1.03, Table 2) or increasing intensity weighted lifetime days of carbaryl use (RRQ4 = 0.95, 95 % CI: 0.86 -1.05, p-trend = 0.26) (Table 3).

Although there was no association with ever-use, higher intensityweighted lifetime days of use of carbaryl was associated with stomach cancer (RRT3 = 2.07, 95 % CI: 1.05 -4.07, p-trend = 0.02) (Table 3). This association remained significantly elevated when carbaryl exposure was lagged by 5 years (Table 4); we were unable to evaluate further lag periods because of a small number of exposed cases. In stratified analyses, we found no evidence of interaction of ever use of carbaryl with nitrate  from  drinking  water  and  stomach  cancer  ( data  not  shown ); however, we were only able to evaluate interactions with ever-use due to a small number of participants with available nitrate information. Additionally, ever-use of carbaryl was associated with an increased risk of esophageal cancer (RR = 1.52, 95 % CI: 1.01 -2.27) (Table 2), though there was no evidence of an exposure-response in IWLD (RRQ4 = 1.28, 95 % CI: 0.55 -2.99, p-trend = 0.34) (Table 3). These findings were unchanged in sensitivity analyses where we further adjusted for potential confounders of esophageal cancer, such as alcohol and smokeless tobacco ( data not shown) . Finally, we saw a suggestive association between ever-use of carbaryl and tongue cancer (RR = 1.91, 95 % CI: 0.95 -3.81) (Table 2), though we were unable to conduct exposure-response analyses due to a small number of exposed cases (n = 8).

Neither ever-use (RR = 1.04, 95 % CI: 0.96 -1.12) nor increasing IWLD of use of carbaryl (RRQ4 = 0.91, 0.76 -1.08, p-trend = 0.17) was associated with total prostate cancer. Likewise, there was no association with either ever-use (RR = 0.99, 95 % CI: 0.88 -1.11) or increasing IWLD use of carbaryl (RRQ4 = 1.08, 95 % CI: 0.86 -1.27, p-trend = 0.50) and aggressive prostate cancer. However, when carbaryl exposure was lagged by 30 years, there was a significantly elevated risk of aggressive prostate  cancer  (RR  Q4 = 1.56,  95  %  CI:  1.18 -2.07, p-trend = 0.002) (Table 4).

Thyroid  cancer  was  inversely  associated  with  both  ever-use  of carbaryl  (RR = 0.49,  95  %  CI:  0.30 -0.78)  (Table  2)  and  increasing intensity-weighted  lifetime  days  of  use  (RRM2 = 0.45,  95  %  CI: 0.19 -1.06, p-trend = 0.11), though the number of carbaryl-exposed cases was  small  (n = 14)  (Table  3).  The  inverse  associations  remained  in sensitivity analyses, where we further adjusted for other potential confounders, including family history of cancer, BMI, and pesticides previously associated with thyroid cancer in the AHS (metalaxyl, lindane, and chlorimuron-ethyl).

For melanoma, there was limited evidence of an association with carbaryl use (ever-use RR = 1.13, 95 % CI: 0.92 -1.40, Table 2) and the highest quartile of intensity-weighted lifetime days (RRQ4 = 1.13, 95 % CI: 0.72 -1.78 , p-trend = 0.81) (Table 3). These results were unchanged in sensitivity analyses ( data not shown) , which adjusted for melanomaspecific risk factors, including skin reactivity, hours of sun exposure, pesticides previously associated with melanoma in the AHS (maneb/ mancozeb,  parathion,  malathion,  acetochlor),  and  additional  factors adjusted for in previous analyses (i.e., hair color, skin reactivity). We assessed potential effect modification by stratifying on sun exposure; results remained unchanged when stratified ( data not shown ).

In our analyses, NHL was not associated with ever-use of carbaryl (RR = 0.97, 95 % CI: 0.83 -1.14) (Table 2) or increasing carbaryl use (Table 3). The risk of follicular lymphoma (FL) was elevated, though not statistically significant, for above the median IWLD (RRM2 = 1.72, 95 %

Table 3 Adjusted rate ratios and 95 % confidence intervals for intensity-weighted lifetime days of carbaryl use and select cancer sites among AHS applicators.

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 3 Adjusted rate ratios and 95 % confidence intervals for intensity-weighted lifetime days of carbaryl use and select cancer sites among AHS applicators.</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Cancer Site a</th><th>Carbaryl Use</th><th>Exposed Cases</th><th>RR &amp; 95 % CI</th><th>p -trend</th></tr><tr><td>All cancers combined</td><td>None</td><td>4084</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>581</td><td>1.02 (0.93, 1.12)</td><td>0.26</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>582</td><td>1.00 (0.92, 1.10)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>581</td><td>1.04 (0.95, 1.14)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>580</td><td>0.95 (0.86, 1.05)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Oral Cavity</td><td>None</td><td>108</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>18</td><td>1.34 (0.81, 2.22)</td><td>0.18</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>19</td><td>1.26 (0.76, 2.11)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>16</td><td>1.06 (0.58, 1.91)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>9</td><td>0.65 (0.31, 1.37)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Lip b</td><td>None</td><td>38</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.17</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T1</td><td>7</td><td>0.90 (0.35, 2.34) 1.47 (0.67, 3.22)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T2 T3</td><td>8 6</td><td>1.37 (0.51, 3.72)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Pharynx</td><td>None</td><td>28</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M1</td><td>10</td><td>1.36 (0.65, 2.87)</td><td>0.22</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M2</td><td>6</td><td>0.57 (0.20, 1.64)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Esophagus c</td><td>None</td><td>48</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>9</td><td>1.57 (0.74, 3.32)</td><td>0.34</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>10</td><td>1.48 (0.70, 3.11)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3 Q4</td><td>11 8</td><td>1.65 (0.80, 3.41) 1.28 (0.55, 2.99)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Stomach b</td><td>None</td><td>50</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T1</td><td>6</td><td>0.68 (0.27, 1.74)</td><td>0.02</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T2</td><td>9</td><td>0.98 (0.44, 2.17)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T3</td><td>18</td><td>2.07 (1.05, 4.07)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Colon</td><td>None</td><td>292</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>37</td><td>0.99 (0.66, 1.49)</td><td>0.82</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>40</td><td>0.98 (0.68, 1.40)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>31</td><td>0.82 (0.56, 1.22)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Rectum</td><td>Q4 None</td><td>44 127</td><td>1.03 (0.72, 1.48) ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>15</td><td>0.82 (0.45, 1.51)</td><td>0.39</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>14 18</td><td>0.81 (0.42, 1.56)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3 Q4</td><td>13</td><td>1.13 (0.67, 1.93) 0.72 (0.37, 1.39)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Gall &amp; Biliary c</td><td>None</td><td>18</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M1</td><td>5</td><td>0.77 (0.26, 2.29)</td><td>0.56</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>5</td><td>0.68 (0.22, 2.11)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Pancreas</td><td>M2 None</td><td>92</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>13</td><td>0.88 (0.46, 1.70)</td><td>0.74</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>9</td><td>0.74 (0.36, 1.54)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3 Q4</td><td>17 13</td><td>1.33 (0.76, 2.31) 0.87 (0.45, 1.67)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Larynx b</td><td>None</td><td>32</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T1</td><td>5</td><td>1.08 (0.42, 2.77)</td><td>0.15</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T2 T3</td><td>7 10</td><td>1.01 (0.37, 2.74) 1.82 (0.79, 4.20)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Lung</td><td>None</td><td>330</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>37</td><td>0.75 (0.53, 1.08)</td><td>0.74</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>47</td><td>0.83 (0.59, 1.17)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>60</td><td>0.84 (0.61, 1.16)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Melanoma</td><td>Q4</td><td>80</td><td>0.89 (0.66, 1.20)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>None</td><td>196</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1 Q2</td><td>41 27</td><td>1.55 (1.08, 2.20) 1.05 (0.69, 1.60)</td><td>0.81</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>27</td><td>1.18 (0.75, 1.85)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>29</td><td>1.13 (0.72, 1.78) ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>245</td><td>1.11 (0.96,</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>231</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Prostate Cancer d</td><td>None</td><td>1582</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1.28)</td><td>0.17</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td></td><td>1.07 (0.92, 1.25)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>230</td><td>1.14 (0.98, 1.33)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Aggressive Prostate Cancer d,e</td><td>Q4 None</td><td>195 347</td><td>0.91 (0.76, 1.08) ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>57</td><td>1.16 (0.94, 1.43)</td><td>0.50</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>45</td><td>0.90 (0.72, 1.14)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>44</td><td>0.92 (0.70, 1.20)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Kidney c</td><td>Q4</td><td>58</td><td>1.08 (0.86, 1.27)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>None Q1</td><td>154 18</td><td>ref. 0.89 (0.54, 1.49)</td><td>0.53</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>21</td><td>0.90 (0.54, 1.49)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>19</td><td>0.86 (0.51, 1.43) 0.86 (0.49, 1.51)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>20</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Bladder</td><td>None</td><td>204</td><td>ref.</td><td>continued on next page )</td></tr></tbody></table>Table 3 ( continued )

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 3 ( continued )</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Cancer Site a</th><th>Carbaryl Use</th><th>Exposed Cases</th><th>RR &amp; 95 % CI</th><th>p -trend</th></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>32</td><td>1.07 (0.73, 1.56)</td><td>0.28</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>44</td><td>1.29 (0.90, 1.86)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>37</td><td>1.15 (0.79, 1.67)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>30</td><td>0.84 (0.54, 1.28)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Brain c</td><td>None</td><td>53</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M1</td><td>8</td><td>0.62 (0.29, 1.32)</td><td>0.95</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M2</td><td>11</td><td>0.95 (0.44, 2.05)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Thyroid</td><td>None</td><td>61</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M1</td><td>7</td><td>0.48 (0.22, 1.04)</td><td>0.11</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M2</td><td>7</td><td>0.45 (0.19, 1.06)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NHL</td><td>None</td><td>356</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>47</td><td>0.95 (0.70, 1.30)</td><td>0.66</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>48</td><td>0.96 (0.67, 1.36)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>37</td><td>0.86 (0.60, 1.23)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>46</td><td>1.07 (0.75, 1.52)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NHL, B-Cell</td><td>None</td><td>325</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>45</td><td>0.99 (0.72, 1.34)</td><td>0.66</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>46</td><td>0.99 (0.70, 1.41)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>34</td><td>0.86 (0.59, 1.24)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>CLL/SLL</td><td>None</td><td>80</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T1</td><td>19</td><td>1.24 (0.73, 2.10)</td><td>0.77</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T2</td><td>10</td><td>0.71 (0.34, 1.50)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T3</td><td>10</td><td>0.92 (0.43, 1.96)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Follicular Lymphoma</td><td>None</td><td>39</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M1</td><td>10</td><td>1.24 (0.63, 2.44)</td><td>0.19</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M2</td><td>11</td><td>1.72 (0.79, 3.74)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Leukemia b</td><td>None</td><td>52</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>7</td><td>0.75 (0.29, 1.91)</td><td>0.21</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>14</td><td>1.76 (0.93, 3.31)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>8</td><td>1.23 (0.56, 2.74)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>14</td><td>1.71 (0.80, 3.68)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Myeloid Leukemia b</td><td>None</td><td>45</td><td>ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>6</td><td>0.71 (0.25, 2.01)</td><td>0.67</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>11</td><td>1.67 (0.84, 3.30)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>6</td><td>1.05 (0.42, 2.64)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>8</td><td>0.97 (0.36, 2.62)</td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>Note: RR, Rate Ratio. 95 % CI = 95 % Confidence Interval. NHL, Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma. CLL/SLL, Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia/Small Lymphocytic Leukemia; Cutpoints for carbaryl exposure based on IWLD among cancer cases. Q0: 0 (no reported use), Q1: &gt; 0 -≤ 302.93, Q2: &gt; 302.93 -≤ 991.64, Q3: &gt; 991.64 -≤ 3875, Q4: &gt; 3875. Tertiles: T0: 0, T1: &gt; 0 -≤ 434, T2: &gt; 434 -≤ 2254, T3: &gt; 2254. Median: M0: 0, M1: ≤ 991.64, M2: &gt; 991.64. Linear p-

trend trend based on Wald test by using median of each exposure category as a continuous variable. The reported frequencies for the referent group include unexposed cancer cases and do not contribute to the combined total number of cases among exposed participants.

a Unless otherwise noted, models were adjusted for attained age, state of residence, sex, race, education, smoking status (never, formerT1-T3, currentT1-T3), and applicator type. Other models excluded specific variables to preserve stability due to model convergence.

b Adjusted for attained age, state of residence, race, education, smoking status (never, former T1-T3, currentT1-T3), and applicator type.

c Adjusted for attained age, state of residence, sex, education, smoking status (never, former T1-T3, currentT1-T3), and applicator type.

d Male applicators only.

e Aggressive prostate cancer defined as: total Gleason score of 8, poorly differentiated, a diagnosed grade or stage at or above 3, or fatal (i.e., underlying cause of death was prostate cancer).

f Adjusted for attained age, state of residence, education, smoking status (never, former T1-T3, currentT1-T3), and applicator type.

CI: 0.79 -3.74, p-trend = 0.18). For lifetime days of use, a similar pattern for FL was observed, which achieved statistical significance (RRM2 = 2.16, 95 % CI: 1.01 -4.60, p-trend = 0.04, Supplemental Table 1).

For the remaining cancer sites included in this evaluation, there were no notable patterns of associations with carbaryl use. Results for cumulative lifetime days were generally similar in magnitude and direction to the results of the intensity-weighted lifetime days of exposure (Supplemental Table 1).

## 4. Discussion

In this updated analysis of carbaryl use among AHS applicators, we provide novel evidence of cancer  at several  sites.  We  observed  an  elevated risk of stomach cancer in association with increasing carbaryl use, which persisted when carbaryl exposure was lagged by 5 years. Additionally, both esophageal and tongue cancers were positively associated with ever use of carbaryl. We also noted an increased risk of aggressive prostate cancer when carbaryl exposure was lagged by 30 years and an inverse association between carbaryl use and thyroid cancer.

Although  previous  studies  have  suggested  an  increased  risk  of stomach cancer among agricultural workers (Acquavella et al., 1998; Shah et al., 2020), few have focused on carbaryl specifically. Our evaluation is, to the best of our knowledge, the first to report an association between carbaryl and stomach cancer. An early evaluation in the AHS of carbaryl was unable to examine risk of stomach cancer as there were too few exposed cases (Mahajan et al., 2007). A previous population-based case-control study with 9 exposed cases reported no association between carbaryl  and  stomach  cancer  (Lee  et  al.,  2004).  However,  in  that case-control  study,  proxy  respondents  (mostly  spouses,  children,  or parents) were the source of exposure information for 80 % of stomach cancer cases. These proxy respondents were more likely to report 'don ' t know ' and less likely to report use of specific pesticides as compared to the cases themselves, potentially resulting in misclassification of exposure (Lee et al., 2004). In contrast, in the current evaluation, all participants provided self-reported information regarding pesticide use.

While the mechanisms linking carbaryl to stomach cancer are unknown, one possibility involves nitrosation. Carbaryl is able to form Nnitroso  carbaryl  in  the  presence  of  nitrosating  agents  derived  from

Table 4 Adjusted rate ratios and 95 % confidence intervals in relation to lagged intensity-weighted lifetime days of carbaryl use and select cancer sites among AHS applicators. P.A. Erickson et al. International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 268 (2025) 114615

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 4 Adjusted rate ratios and 95 % confidence intervals in relation to lagged intensity-weighted lifetime days of carbaryl use and select cancer sites among AHS applicators. P.A. Erickson et al. International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 268 (2025) 114615</div></caption><tbody><tr><th rowspan="2">Cancer Site a</th><td></td><th colspan="3">Lag 5</th><th colspan="3">Lag 15</th><th colspan="3">Lag 30</th></tr><tr><th>Carbaryl Use</th><th>Exposed Cases</th><th>RR (95 % CI)</th><th>p - trend</th><th>Exposed Cases</th><th>RR (95 % CI)</th><th>p - trend</th><th>Exposed Cases</th><th>RR (95 % CI)</th><th>p - trend</th></tr><tr><th>All cancers combined</th><td>None</td><td>4172</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.28</td><td>4606</td><td>ref.</td><td></td><td>5602</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.49</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>560</td><td>1.05 (0.96, 1.15)</td><td></td><td>458</td><td>1.06 (0.96, 1.17)</td><td></td><td>204</td><td>1.18 (1.02, 1.35)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>559</td><td>0.99 (0.90, 1.08)</td><td></td><td>445</td><td>0.98 (0.88, 1.08)</td><td></td><td>201</td><td>0.85 (0.74, 0.98)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>559</td><td>1.07 (0.97, 1.18)</td><td></td><td>449</td><td>1.04 (0.94, 1.15)</td><td></td><td>200</td><td>0.99 (0.86, 1.14)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>558</td><td>0.95 (0.86, 1.05)</td><td></td><td>450</td><td>0.95 (0.86,</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.95 (0.82, 1.10)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Oral Cavity</th><td>None</td><td>111</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1.06)</td><td>0.35</td><td>201</td><td></td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>17</td><td>ref. 1.34 (0.80, 2.25)</td><td>0.27</td><td>129 15</td><td>ref. 1.38 (0.80, 2.37)</td><td>0.10</td><td>158 g</td><td>- -</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2 Q3</td><td>20 11</td><td>1.35 (0.82, 2.23)</td><td></td><td>9 11</td><td>0.77 (0.39, 1.52)</td><td></td><td>g g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>10</td><td>0.73 (0.35, 1.49) 0.73 (0.36, 1.48)</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>1.03 (0.54, 1.99) 0.71 (0.36, 1.42)</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>- -</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Pharynx</th><td>None</td><td>28</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.26</td><td>31</td><td>ref.</td><td></td><td>39</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M1</td><td>11</td><td>1.67 (0.82, 3.44)</td><td></td><td>8</td><td>1.63 (0.73, 3.62)</td><td>0.60</td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>b</th><td>M2 None</td><td>5 48</td><td>0.52 (0.17, 1.60) ref.</td><td></td><td>5 55</td><td>0.71 (0.23, 2.19) ref.</td><td>0.69</td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><th>Esophagus</th><td>Q1</td><td>9</td><td>1.66 (0.80, 3.48)</td><td>0.66</td><td>8</td><td>1.90 (0.84, 4.26)</td><td></td><td>70</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>10</td><td>1.54 (0.73, 3.25)</td><td></td><td>10</td><td>1.72 (0.82, 3.60)</td><td></td><td>g 8</td><td>- -</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1.82 (0.89, 3.19)</td><td></td><td></td><td>1.25 (0.52, 3.00)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3 Q4</td><td>11 8</td><td>1.38 (0.59,1.08)</td><td></td><td>6 7</td><td>1.34 (0.56, 3.20)</td><td></td><td>g g</td><td>- -</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Stomach c</th><td>None</td><td>51</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.01</td><td>54</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>74</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T1 T2</td><td>6 8</td><td>0.84 (0.35, 2.21) 0.88 (0.38, 2.03)</td><td></td><td>g 13</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>g g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>None</td><td>18</td><td>2.20 (1.12, 4.33)</td><td></td><td>13</td><td>- -</td><td></td><td>5</td><td>- -</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Colon</th><td>T3</td><td>298</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.63</td><td>322</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.72</td><td>399</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.41</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>36</td><td>0.98 (0.67, 1.43)</td><td></td><td>30</td><td>1.00 (0.68, 1.46)</td><td></td><td>11</td><td>0.89 (0.49, 1.63)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>37</td><td>0.94 (0.67, 1.34)</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.81 (0.53, 1.23)</td><td></td><td>8</td><td>0.47 (0.23, 0.95)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>29</td><td>0.81 (0.54, 1.20)</td><td></td><td>25 33</td><td>1.14 (0.78, 1.66)</td><td></td><td>14</td><td>0.96 (0.56, 1.66)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Rectum</th><td>Q4 None</td><td>44 133</td><td>1.08 (0.75, 1.54) ref.</td><td>0.45</td><td>34 150</td><td>1.05 (0.71, 1.56) ref.</td><td>0.40</td><td>12 170</td><td>0.77 (0.42, 1.40) -</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>14</td><td>0.87 (0.50,1.53)</td><td></td><td>7</td><td>0.57 (0.27, 1.22)</td><td></td><td>5</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>10</td><td>0.64 (0.32, 1.31)</td><td></td><td>7</td><td>0.48 (0.21, 1.07)</td><td></td><td>5</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3 Q4</td><td>18 12</td><td>1.16 (0.68, 1.99) 0.73 (0.38, 1.41)</td><td></td><td>14 9</td><td>1.08 (0.61, 1.93) 0.67 (0.33, 1.38)</td><td></td><td>g g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>None</td><td>95</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.82</td><td>104</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.95</td><td>124</td><td>- -</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><th>Pancreas</th><td>Q1</td><td>11</td><td>0.81 (0.41, 1.61)</td><td></td><td>11</td><td>1.08 (0.58, 2.21)</td><td></td><td>5</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>9</td><td>0.79 (0.38, 1.66)</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>0.59 (0.26, 1.35)</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>16</td><td>1.28 (0.73, 2.24)</td><td></td><td>11</td><td>1.06 (0.55, 2.04)</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Larynx c</th><td>Q4</td><td>13</td><td>0.89 (0.46, 1.71)</td><td></td><td>12</td><td>0.99 (0.51, 1.91)</td><td></td><td>8</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>None</td><td>32</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.12</td><td>39</td><td>- -</td><td>-</td><td>47</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T1 T2</td><td>6</td><td>1.31 (0.54, 3.16)</td><td></td><td>5</td><td></td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T3</td><td>6</td><td>0.87 (0.29, 2.67)</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Lung</th><td>None</td><td>10 339</td><td>1.94 (0.84, 4.48) ref.</td><td>0.67</td><td>7 382</td><td>- ref.</td><td>0.70</td><td>g 482</td><td>- ref.</td><td>0.21</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>34</td><td>0.74 (0.51, 1.08)</td><td></td><td>27</td><td>0.83 (0.56, 1.23)</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>0.61 (0.32, 1.18)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>47</td><td>0.85 (0.62, 1.17)</td><td></td><td>36</td><td>0.83 (0.58, 1.18)</td><td></td><td>16</td><td>0.67 (0.41, 1.11)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>59</td><td>0.92 (0.67, 1.25)</td><td></td><td>50</td><td>0.99 (0.72, 1.35)</td><td></td><td>26</td><td>1.04 (0.69, 1.55)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Melanoma</th><td>Q4 None</td><td>75 198</td><td>0.89 (0.67, 1.19) ref.</td><td>0.97</td><td>59 226</td><td>0.92 (0.68, 1.24) ref.</td><td>0.45</td><td>21 275</td><td>0.73 (0.46, 1.14) ref.</td><td>0.89</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>41</td><td>1.64 (1.15, 2.34)</td><td></td><td>29</td><td>1.45 (0.96, 2.18)</td><td></td><td>12</td><td>1.52 (0.85, 2.72)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>26</td><td>1.07 (0.69, 1.66)</td><td></td><td>27</td><td>1.29 (0.86, 1.95)</td><td></td><td>18</td><td>1.72 (1.06, 2.80)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>29</td><td>1.36 (0.89, 2.07)</td><td></td><td></td><td>1.04 (0.64, 1.67)</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>0.69 (0.30, 1.57)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>26</td><td>1.07 (0.67, 1.71)</td><td></td><td>20 18</td><td>0.87 (0.52, 1.47)</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>1.02 (0.51, 2.03)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Prostate Cancer d</th><td>None</td><td>1617</td><td>ref. 1.04 (0.90, 1.21)</td><td>0.15</td><td>1781</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.30</td><td>2163</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.80</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>235</td><td>1.12 (0.37, 1.29)</td><td></td><td>194</td><td>1.11 (0.95, 1.29)</td><td></td><td>86</td><td>1.24 (1.00, 1.54)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2 Q3</td><td>224</td><td></td><td></td><td>179</td><td>1.03 (0.88, 1.20)</td><td></td><td>83</td><td>0.90 (0.72, 1.13)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>219</td><td>1.14 (0.98, 1.33)</td><td></td><td>172</td><td>1.06 (0.89, 1.25)</td><td></td><td>76</td><td>1.01 (0.80, 1.28)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4 None</td><td>188</td><td>0.90 (0.76, 1.07) ref.</td><td>0.67</td><td>157</td><td>0.92 (0.77, 1.10) ref.</td><td>0.49</td><td>75</td><td>0.97 (0.77,1.24) ref.</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Aggressive Prostate</th><td>Q1</td><td>352</td><td>0.83 (0.66, 1.05)</td><td></td><td>388</td><td>(0.67,</td><td></td><td>460 16</td><td>(0.70,</td><td>0.002</td></tr><tr><th>Cancer d,e</th><td>Q2</td><td>58</td><td>1.23 (1.00,1.51)</td><td></td><td>46 35</td><td>1.12 (0.89, 1.40) 0.86 (0.66, 1.10)</td><td></td><td>23</td><td>1.00 1.42)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>42 44</td><td>0.94 (0.73, 1.21)</td><td></td><td>35</td><td>0.88 1.14)</td><td></td><td>23</td><td>1.07 (0.79, 1.45) 1.30 (0.95, 1.76)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>b</th><td>Q4</td><td>55</td><td>1.05 (0.83, 1.33)</td><td></td><td></td><td>1.09 (0.85, 1.38)</td><td></td><td>29</td><td>1.56 2.08)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Kidney</th><td>None</td><td>156</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.70</td><td>47 166</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.73</td><td>205</td><td>(1.18, -</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>16</td><td>0.93 (0.55, 1.59)</td><td></td><td>16</td><td>1.10 (0.66, 1.84)</td><td></td><td>8</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2 Q3</td><td>21</td><td>0.94 (0.57, 1.57)</td><td></td><td>17</td><td>1.06 (0.63, 1.78)</td><td></td><td>7 g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>20</td><td>1.00 (0.60, 1.65)</td><td></td><td>18</td><td>1.19 (0.72, 1.98)</td><td></td><td></td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>19</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>11</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Bladder</th><td>None</td><td>206</td><td>0.88 (0.50, 1.55) ref.</td><td>0.23</td><td>15 241</td><td>0.91 (0.51, 1.62) ref.</td><td>0.20</td><td>294</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.87</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>32</td><td>1.10 (0.75, 1.61)</td><td></td><td>26</td><td>1.05 (0.69, 1.58)</td><td></td><td>17</td><td>1.64 (1.00, 2.68)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>44</td><td>1.32 (0.92, 1.90)</td><td></td><td>35</td><td>1.28 (0.89, 1.84)</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.84 (0.47, 1.50)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>37</td><td>1.23 (0.84, 1.79)</td><td></td><td>21</td><td>0.78 (0.49, 1.24)</td><td></td><td>12 9</td><td>0.70 (0.36, 1.37)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td>0.81 (0.52, 1.26)</td><td></td><td>24</td><td>0.77 (0.49, 1.22)</td><td></td><td>15</td><td>1.09 (0.63, 1.88)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>( continued on next page )

Table 4 ( continued )

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 4 ( continued )</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Cancer Site a</th><td></td><th colspan="3">Lag 5</th><th colspan="3">Lag 15</th><th colspan="3">Lag 30</th></tr><tr><td></td><th>Carbaryl Use</th><th>Exposed Cases</th><th>RR (95 % CI)</th><th>p - trend</th><th>Exposed Cases</th><th>RR (95 % CI)</th><th>p - trend</th><th>Exposed Cases</th><th>RR (95 % CI)</th><th>p - trend</th></tr><tr><th>Brain b</th><td>None</td><td>55</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.89</td><td>58</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.83</td><td>64</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M1</td><td>7</td><td>0.62 (0.28, 1.37)</td><td></td><td>5</td><td>0.53 (0.21, 1.34)</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M2</td><td>10</td><td>0.89 (0.40, 1.95)</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>1.03 (0.47, 2.27)</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Thyroid</th><td>None</td><td>61</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.10</td><td>62</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.18</td><td>71</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M1</td><td>8</td><td>0.54 (0.26, 1.16)</td><td></td><td>8</td><td>0.79 (0.37, 1.67)</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M2</td><td>6</td><td>0.43 (0.17, 1.06)</td><td></td><td>5</td><td>0.51 (0.19, 1.35)</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>NHL</th><td>None</td><td>359</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.56</td><td>384</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.55</td><td>469</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.41</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>50</td><td>1.05 (0.77, 1.43)</td><td></td><td>42</td><td>1.12 (0.81, 1.55)</td><td></td><td>21</td><td>1.39 (0.89, 2.16)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>44</td><td>0.92 (0.65, 1.31)</td><td></td><td>39</td><td>1.01 (0.71, 1.43)</td><td></td><td>17</td><td>0.87 (0.54, 1.42)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>36</td><td>0.92 (0.64, 1.32)</td><td></td><td>33</td><td>1.03 (0.71, 1.49)</td><td></td><td>15</td><td>0.97 (0.57, 1.64)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>45</td><td>1.11 (0.78, 1.58)</td><td></td><td>36</td><td>1.13 (0.78, 1.65)</td><td></td><td>12</td><td>0.79 (0.44, 1.43)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>NHL, B-Cell</th><td>None</td><td>328</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.47</td><td>348</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.34</td><td>429</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.43</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>48</td><td>1.10 (0.80, 1.50)</td><td></td><td>42</td><td>1.23 (0.89, 1.70)</td><td></td><td>21</td><td>1.50 (0.97, 2.33)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>42</td><td>0.95 (0.67, 1.36)</td><td></td><td>35</td><td>0.99 (0.69, 1.43)</td><td></td><td>17</td><td>0.95 (0.58, 1.54)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>32</td><td>0.89 (0.60, 1.30)</td><td></td><td>33</td><td>1.14 (0.78,1.65)</td><td></td><td>15</td><td>1.05 (0.62, 1.78)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>43</td><td>1.15 (0.80, 1.65)</td><td></td><td>35</td><td>1.22 (0.83, 1.80)</td><td></td><td>11</td><td>0.78 (0.42, 1.45)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>CLL/SLL</th><td>None</td><td>81</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.48</td><td>85</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.67</td><td>105</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T1</td><td>19</td><td>1.33 (0.78, 2.26)</td><td></td><td>15</td><td>1.28 (0.72, 2.27)</td><td></td><td>7</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T2</td><td>9</td><td>0.72 (0.34, 1.50)</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>0.85 (0.40, 1.80)</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T3</td><td>10</td><td>0.98 (0.46, 2.08)</td><td></td><td>10</td><td>1.36 (0.65, 2.85)</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Follicular</th><td>None</td><td>39</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.19</td><td>40</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.07</td><td>52</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><th>Lymphoma f</th><td>M1</td><td>10</td><td>1.31 (0.66, 2.59)</td><td></td><td>11</td><td>1.54 (0.79, 2.98)</td><td></td><td>7</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M2</td><td>11</td><td>1.89 (0.87, 4.11)</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>1.81 (0.86, 3.84)</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Leukemia c</th><td>None</td><td>54</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.34</td><td>62</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.86</td><td>79</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>7</td><td>0.89 (0.39, 2.07)</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>0.85 (0.34,2.12)</td><td></td><td>5</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>14</td><td>1.80 (0.97, 3.33)</td><td></td><td>11</td><td>1.81 (0.94, 3.48)</td><td></td><td>5</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>7</td><td>1.11 (0.49, 2.53)</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>1.57 (0.75,3.28)</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>13</td><td>1.57 (0.72, 3.40)</td><td></td><td>7</td><td>1.13 (0.47, 2.67)</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Myeloid Leukemia</th><td>None</td><td>47</td><td>ref.</td><td>0.58</td><td>54</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>65</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q1</td><td>6</td><td>0.87 (0.35, 2.16)</td><td></td><td>5</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>5</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q2</td><td>11</td><td>1.70 (0.87, 3.32)</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q3</td><td>5</td><td>0.89 (0.34, 2.33)</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Q4</td><td>7</td><td>0.80 (0.28, 2.29)</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>g</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>Note: RR, Rate Ratio. 95 % CI, 95 % Confidence Interval. NHL, Non-Hogkin Lymphoma. CLL/SLL, Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia/Small Lymphocytic Leukemia; Cutpoints for carbaryl exposure based on IWLD among cancer cases. Q0: 0 (no reported use), Q1: &gt; 0 -≤ 302.93, Q2: &gt; 302.93 -≤ 991.64, Q3: &gt; 991.64 -≤ 3875, Q4: &gt; 3875. Tertiles: T0: 0, T1: &gt; 0 -≤ 434, T2: &gt; 434 -≤ 2254, T3: &gt; 2254. Median: M0: 0, M1: ≤ 991.64, M2: &gt; 991.64. Linear ptrend trend based on Wald test by using median of each exposure category as a continuous variable.

a Unless otherwise noted, models were adjusted for attained age, state of residence, sex, race, education, smoking status (never, formerT1-T3, currentT1-T3), and applicator type. Other models excluded specific variables to preserve stability due to model convergence.

b Adjusted for attained age, state of residence, sex, education, smoking status (never, formerT1-T3, currentT1-T3), and applicator type.

- c Adjusted for attained age, state of residence, race, education, smoking status (never, formerT1-T3, currentT1-T3), and applicator type.

d Male applicators only.

e Aggressive prostate cancer defined as: total Gleason score of 8, poorly differentiated, a diagnosed grade or stage at or above 3, or fatal (i.e., underlying cause of death was prostate cancer).

f Adjusted for attained age, state of residence, education, smoking status (never, formerT1-T3, currentT1-T3), and applicator type.

g Less than 5 participants.

ingested nitrate and nitrite; several N-nitroso compounds (NOC) have been shown to be carcinogenic in experimental studies (IARC, 1983). NOCs have also been associated with an increased risk of several cancers (IARC, 2010; Ward et al., 2018). Studies have shown N-nitroso-carbaryl can form in the stomach when carbaryl reacts with ingested nitrate and nitrite  from  drinking  water  and  food  sources  (Elespuru  and  Lijinsky, 1973; IARC, 1983) and high doses of this compound have been shown to induce gastric cancer in rats (Eisenbrand et al., 1976). Given this, we attempted to evaluate potential effect modification of drinking water nitrate on the association between stomach cancer and carbaryl exposure in our evaluation by using data on nitrate in drinking water from the AHS (Manley et al., 2022). However, only a limited number of cases had information on drinking water nitrate, which precluded exposure-response analyses. Based on the limited number of cases, we saw no effect modification by nitrate.

Although there was no association with aggressive prostate cancer in unlagged analyses in our evaluation, there was a significant exposureresponse trend when carbaryl exposure was lagged by 30 years. Prior studies focused on carbaryl and aggressive prostate cancer are limited: no  association  with  aggressive  prostate  cancer  was  reported  in  a previous  AHS  analysis,  though  lagged  exposures  were  not  evaluated (Koutros et al., 2013). While the mechanisms through which carbaryl may influence prostate cancer risk are  not  understood,  experimental studies have suggested carbaryl may be genotoxic and potentially act as an  endocrine  disruptor  ( ¨ Onfelt  and  Klasterska,  1984;  Renglin  et  al., 1999;  Tange  et  al.,  2016;  United  States  Environmental  Protection Agency, 2021); both of which have been implicated in prostate cancer carcinogenesis (Corti et al., 2022; Saramaki and Visakorpi, 2007).

Our findings of an inverse association between thyroid cancer and carbaryl are consistent with a previous analysis in the AHS (Lerro et al., 2021). Additionally, a previous analysis in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture, a sub-study of the AHS, noted a suggestive inverse association between the highest quartile of exposure to carbaryl and levels of the thyroid hormone T3 (total triiodothyronine, p-trend = 0.08) (Lerro et al., 2018, 2021); though the role of thyroid hormones in the  development  of  thyroid  cancer  is  not  yet  completely  understood (Wang et al., 2022). Further studies are warranted to better understand potential  associations  between  carbaryl  exposure,  thyroid  hormones, and risk of thyroid cancer.

In  contrast  to  two  prior  evaluations  in  the  AHS  that  reported  an

increased risk of melanoma with increasing carbaryl use (Dennis et al., 2010; Mahajan et al., 2007), we found limited evidence linking carbaryl use to melanoma risk. This lack of association was consistent for both exposure  metrics,  lagged  analyses,  and  after  further  adjustment  for additional risk factors that were also considered in previous evaluations (such as hours of sun exposure, skin reactivity, and hair color) (Mahajan et al., 2007). The differences in results may be explained by our study ' s inclusion of more than twice as many exposed cases, the incorporation of additional  follow-up  time,  and  updated  exposure  information,  which together allowed for a more robust evaluation as compared to the two prior AHS evaluations (Dennis et al., 2010; Mahajan et al., 2007). To our knowledge,  no  other  studies  have  reported  an  association  between carbaryl and melanoma. However, a pooled analysis of two case-control studies from Brazil and Italy observed an increased risk of melanoma among those  ever-exposed  to  carbamate  pesticides  (n = 10  exposed cases; OR = 4.15, 95 % CI: 0.81 -21.1), but did not report results of individual carbamate insecticides (Fortes et al., 2016).

The  lack  of  association  observed  between  NHL  and  carbaryl  is generally  consistent  with  previous  AHS  evaluations  (Alavanja  et  al., 2014; Mahajan et al., 2007). Similarly, analyses from both AGRICOH, a consortium comprised of three cohort studies (including the AHS), and the  North  American  Pooled  Project  (NAPP)  a  pooled  analysis  of case-control studies in the US and Canada, noted no associations between ever exposure to carbaryl and risk of NHL (Koutros et al., 2019; Leon  et  al.,  2019).  However,  in  an  evaluation  from  the  InterLymph Consortium, which pooled nine case-control studies from the US and Europe (none of which were part of the NAPP), ever-use of carbaryl was associated  with  an  increased  risk  of  NHL  (OR = 1.34,  95  %  CI: 1.03 -1.75), particularly for longer use and when exposure was lagged by at least 10 years (De Roos et al., 2021). Moreover, in both the NAPP and InterLymph  Consortium,  exposure  to  carbaryl  was  associated  with follicular lymphoma (FL) (De Roos et al., 2021; Koutros et al., 2019), while the NAPP also observed an association with small-cell lymphocytic lymphoma (another NHL sub-type) (Koutros et al., 2019). In the current evaluation, there was an elevated, though not significant, risk of FL with IWLD of carbaryl use, which achieved statistical significance in analyses of lifetime days.

There are several factors to consider when comparing results for NHL in this analysis to those from the previous studies. Previous associations were based on ever-use or years of carbaryl use, while we used both ever vs. never use and IWLD, a more detailed exposure metric. While ever vs. never use is useful for initial assessments, cumulative exposure metrics provide deeper insight into potential associations (Leon et al., 2019). The evolution of the definition of NHL should also be considered when comparing our results to previous studies. The definition of NHL used in our  evaluation  includes  both  multiple  myeloma  (MM)  and  chronic lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL) (Morton et al., 2007). However, many of the cases included in the NAPP and InterLymph analyses were identified between 1979 and 1986 and were based on the working definition at that time, in which CLL and MM were not included (National Cancer Institute, 1982). In a sensitivity analysis in which we excluded CLL and MM cases  from  our  NHL  analyses,  our  results  remained  unchanged, suggesting  the  definition  change  does  not  explain  the  difference  in findings.

This  prospective  cohort  study  has  several  strengths.  First,  we expanded upon a previous analysis of carbaryl use and incident cancer risk by including up to 14 additional years of follow-up and more than 4000 additional carbaryl-exposed cancer cases. We also incorporated additional pesticide use information from a follow-up questionnaire that was completed by more than 60 % of the cohort. For those who did not complete the follow-up questionnaire, we were able to impute carbaryl use and a previous study has shown there is no evidence of bias from incorporating this imputed data (Andreotti et al., 2019). Additionally, the  exposure  information  was  collected  prior  to  cancer  diagnosis; therefore,  any  misclassification  of  exposure  would  most  likely  be non-differential and which would generally be expected to bias the risk estimates  toward  the  null.  Although  the  exposure  information  was self-reported, which can be a limitation, it has been shown previously that pesticide applicators reliably report on their pesticide usage (Blair et al., 2002; Hoppin et al., 2002). Likewise, while pesticide applicators are exposed to more than one pesticide, we were able to consider the use of  correlated  pesticides,  which  did  not  significantly  impact  the  risk estimates.

In conclusion, this study provides novel evidence of an association between carbaryl use and stomach cancer and evidence of elevated risks of esophageal and tongue cancers. Future studies are needed to confirm these findings and elucidate the biological mechanisms underlying these observed associations.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

Patricia A. Erickson: Writing -original draft, Methodology, Formal analysis. Gabriella Andreotti: Writing -review &amp; editing, Methodology. Richard V. Remigio: Writing -review &amp; editing. Mary H. Ward: Writing -review &amp; editing. Christine G. Parks: Writing -review &amp; editing. Dale P. Sandler: Writing -review &amp; editing. Paul S. Albert: Writing -review &amp; editing. Kathryn Hughes Barry: Writing -review &amp; editing. Jonathan N. Hofmann: Writing -review &amp; editing. Laura E. Beane Freeman: Writing -review &amp; editing, Supervision, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

## Disclosure

None of the authors have any conflicts of interest to disclose.

## Data Availability

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## Ethics Statement

The  study  was  approved  by  the  National  Cancer  Institute  (NCI) Special Studies Institutional Review Board (IRB) and the IRBs of other participating institutions. All participants implied consent by completing the enrollment questionnaire, consistent with IRB rules in effect at the time.

## Sources of support

This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) /National Cancer Institute (Z01CP010119) and NIH / National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (Z01-ES049030). This project was also supported by additional funding  from  the  National  Cancer  Institute  (K07  CA230182  and 3K07CA230182-05S1  to  K.H.B.)  and  the  Maryland  Department  of Health ' s  Cigarette  Restitution  Fund  Program -CH-649-CRF  (salary support for K.H.B.).

## Acknowledgements

Data in this analysis are based on the AHS data releases P1REL2022, P2REL2022, P3REL2022 .  This  work was supported by the intramural research  program  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute  (Z01-CP010119) should be listed before National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (Z01-ES049030).

## Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2025.114615.

## References

- Abreu-Villaça, Y., Levin, E.D., 2017. Developmental neurotoxicity of succeeding generations of insecticides. Environ. Int. 99, 55 -77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. envint.2016.11.019.
- Acquavella, J., Olsen, G., Cole, P., Ireland, B., Kaneene, J., Schuman, S., Holden, L., 1998. Cancer among farmers: a meta-analysis. Ann. Epidemiol. 8 (1), 64 -74. https://doi. org/10.1016/s1047-2797(97)00120-8.
- Alavanja, M.C., Hofmann, J.N., Lynch, C.F., Hines, C.J., Barry, K.H., Barker, J., Buckman, D.W., Thomas, K., Sandler, D.P., Hoppin, J.A., Koutros, S., Andreotti, G., Lubin, J.H., Blair, A., Beane Freeman, L.E., 2014. Non-hodgkin lymphoma risk and insecticide, fungicide and fumigant use in the agricultural health study. PLoS One 9 (10), e109332. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0109332.
- Alavanja, M.C., Sandler, D.P., McMaster, S.B., Zahm, S.H., McDonnell, C.J., Lynch, C.F., Pennybacker, M., Rothman, N., Dosemeci, M., Bond, A.E., Blair, A., 1996. The agricultural health Study. Environ. Health Perspect. 104 (4), 362 -369. https://www. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1469343/pdf/envhper00335-0022.pdf.
- Andreotti, G., Lubin, J.H., Koutros, S., Hofmann, J.N., Sandler, D.P., Lerro, C.C., Parks, C. G., Silverman, D.T., Beane Freeman, L.E., 2019. Response to sheppard and shaffer. J Natl Cancer Inst 111 (2), 216 -218. https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djy201.
- Australian Government, 2024. Carbaryl Chemical Review. Retrieved 6/24/2024 from. https://www.apvma.gov.au/chemicals-and-products/chemical-review/listing/car baryl.
- Blair, A., Tarone, R., Sandler, D., Lynch, C.F., Rowland, A., Wintersteen, W., Steen, W.C., Samanic, C., Dosemeci, M., Alavanja, M.C.R., 2002. Reliability of reporting on lifestyle and agricultural factors by a sample of participants in the Agricultural Health Study from Iowa. Epidemiology 13 (1), 94 -99.
- Coble, J., Thomas, K.W., Hines, C.J., Hoppin, J.A., Dosemeci, M., Curwin, B., Lubin, J.H., Beane Freeman, L.E., Blair, A., Sandler, D.P., Alavanja, M.C., 2011. An updated algorithm for estimation of pesticide exposure intensity in the agricultural health study. Int. J. Environ. Res. Publ. Health 8 (12), 4608 -4622. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/ijerph8124608.
- Corti, M., Lorenzetti, S., Ubaldi, A., Zilli, R., Marcoccia, D., 2022. Endocrine disruptors and prostate cancer. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23 (3). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23031216.
- De Roos, A.J., Schinasi, L.H., Miligi, L., Cerhan, J.R., Bhatti, P., Mannetje, A., Baris, D., Benavente, Y., Benke, G., Clavel, J., Casabonne, D., Fritschi, L., Hofmann, J.N., Huynh, T., Monnereau, A., Piro, S., Slager, S.L., Vajdic, C.M., Wang, S.S., Zhang, Y., Bernstein, L., Cocco, P., 2021. Occupational insecticide exposure and risk of nonhodgkin lymphoma: a pooled case-control Study from the InterLymph consortium. Int. J. Cancer 149 (10), 1768 -1786. https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.33740.
- Dennis, L.K., Lynch, C.F., Sandler, D.P., Alavanja, M.C., 2010. Pesticide use and cutaneous melanoma in pesticide applicators in the agricultural heath study. Environ. Health Perspect. 118 (6), 812 -817. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0901518.
- Dosemeci, M., 2002. A quantitative approach for estimating exposure to pesticides in the agricultural health Study. Ann. Occup. Hyg. 46 (2), 245 -260. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/annhyg/mef011.
- Eisenbrand, G., Schm ¨ ahl, D., Preussmann, R., 1976. Carcinogenicity in rats of high oral doses of N-nitroso-carbaryl, a nitrosated pesticide. Cancer Lett. 1 (5), 281 -284. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0304-3835(75)97774-5.
- Elespuru, R.K., Lijinsky, W., 1973. The formation of carcinogenic nitroso compounds from nitrite and some types of agricultural chemicals. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 11 (5), 807 -817. https://doi.org/10.1016/0015-6264(73)90139-9.
- Euopean Comission, 2007. Article 5 of the Rotterdam Convention - Carbaryl. htt ps://www.pic.int/Portals/5/download.aspx?d = UNEP-FAO-RC-FRA-NOTIF-Carb aryl-63252-EU-20071123.En.pdf.
- Fortes, C., Mastroeni, S., Segatto, M.M., Hohmann, C., Miligi, L., Bakos, L., Bonamigo, R., 2016. Occupational exposure to pesticides with occupational sun exposure increases the risk for cutaneous melanoma. J. Occup. Environ. Med. 58 (4), 370 -375. https:// doi.org/10.1097/JOM.0000000000000665.
- Fritz, A., Percy, C., Jack, A., Shanmugaratnam, K., Sobin, L., Parkin, D.M., Whelan, S., 2013. In: Fritz, A., Percy, C., Jack, A., Shanmugaratnam, K., Sobin, L., Parkin, D.M., Whelan, S. (Eds.), International Classification of Diseases for Oncology, third ed. World Health Organization.
- Health Canada, 2016. Re-evaluation Decision: Carbaryl. https://www.canada.ca/ content/dam/hc-sc/migration/hc-sc/cps-spc/alt\_formats/pdf/pubs/pest/\_decis ions/rvd2016-02/rvd2016-02-eng.pdf.
- Heltshe, S.L., Lubin, J.H., Koutros, S., Coble, J.B., Ji, B.T., Alavanja, M.C., Blair, A., Sandler, D.P., Hines, C.J., Thomas, K.W., Barker, J., Andreotti, G., Hoppin, J.A., Beane Freeman, L.E., 2012. Using multiple imputation to assign pesticide use for non-responders in the follow-up questionnaire in the Agricultural Health Study. J. Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. 22 (4), 409 -416. https://doi.org/10.1038/ jes.2012.31.
- Hines, C.J., Deddens, J.A., Coble, J., Alavanja, M.C.R., 2007. Fungicide application practices and personal protective equipment use among orchard farmers in the agricultural health Study. J. Agric. Saf. Health 13 (2), 205 -223. https://doi.org/ 10.13031/2013.22620.
- Hines, C.J., Deddens, J.A., Jaycox, L.B., Andrews, R.N., Striley, C.A.F., Alavanja, M.C.R., 2008. Captan exposure and evaluation of a pesticide exposure Algorithm among orchard pesticide applicators in the agricultural health Study. Ann. Occup. Hyg. 52 (3), 153 -166. https://doi.org/10.1093/annhyg/men001.
- Hoppin, J.A., Yucel, F., Dosemeci, M., Sandler, D.P., 2002. Accuracy of self-reported pesticide use duration information from licensed pesticide applicators in the Agricultural Health Study. J. Expo. Anal. Environ. Epidemiol. 12 (5), 313 -318. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jea.7500232.
- IARC, 1983. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Miscellaneous Pesticides. IARC Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum, Issue.
- IARC, 1987. Overall Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: an Updating of IARC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42. IARC Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum, Issue.
- IARC, 2010. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Ingested Nitrate and Nitrite, and Cyanobacterial Peptide Toxins (1017-1606 (Print) 1017-1606). IARC Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum, Issue.
- Koutros, S., Beane Freeman, L.E., Lubin, J.H., Heltshe, S.L., Andreotti, G., Barry, K.H., DellaValle, C.T., Hoppin, J.A., Sandler, D.P., Lynch, C.F., Blair, A., Alavanja, M.C., 2013. Risk of total and aggressive prostate cancer and pesticide use in the Agricultural Health Study. Am. J. Epidemiol. 177 (1), 59 -74. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/aje/kws225.
- Koutros, S., Harris, S.A., Spinelli, J.J., Blair, A., McLaughlin, J.R., Zahm, S.H., Kim, S., Albert, P.S., Kachuri, L., Pahwa, M., Cantor, K.P., Weisenburger, D.D., Pahwa, P., Pardo, L.A., Dosman, J.A., Demers, P.A., Beane Freeman, L.E., 2019. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma risk and organophosphate and carbamate insecticide use in the north American pooled project. Environ. Int. 127, 199 -205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. envint.2019.03.018.
- Lee, W.J., Lijinsky, W., Heineman, E.F., Markin, R.S., Weisenburger, D.D., Ward, M.H., 2004. Agricultural pesticide use and adenocarcinomas of the stomach and oesophagus. Occup. Environ. Med. 61 (9), 743 -749. https://doi.org/10.1136/ oem.2003.011858.
- Leon, M.E., Schinasi, L.H., Lebailly, P., Beane Freeman, L.E., Nordby, K.C., Ferro, G., Monnereau, A., Brouwer, M., Tual, S., Baldi, I., Kjaerheim, K., Hofmann, J.N., Kristensen, P., Koutros, S., Straif, K., Kromhout, H., Schuz, J., 2019. Pesticide use and risk of Non-Hodgkin lymphoid malignancies in agricultural cohorts from France, Norway and the USA: a pooled analysis from the AGRICOH consortium. Int. J. Epidemiol. 48 (5), 1519 -1535. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyz017.
- Lerro, C.C., Beane Freeman, L., DellaValle, C.T., 2018. Occupational pesticide exposure and subclinical hypothyroidism among male pesticide applicators. Occup. Environ. Med. 75, 79 -89.
- Lerro, C.C., Beane Freeman, L.E., DellaValle, C.T., Andreotti, G., Hofmann, J.N., Koutros, S., Parks, C.G., Shrestha, S., Alavanja, M.C.R., Blair, A., Lubin, J.H., Sandler, D.P., Ward, M.H., 2021. Pesticide exposure and incident thyroid cancer among male pesticide applicators in agricultural health study. Environ. Int. 146, 106187. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.106187.
- Mahajan, R., Blair, A., Coble, J., Lynch, C.F., Hoppin, J.A., Sandler, D.P., Alavanja, M.C., 2007. Carbaryl exposure and incident cancer in the Agricultural Health Study. Int. J. Cancer 121 (8), 1799 -1805. https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.22836.
- Manley, C.K., Spaur, M., Madrigal, J.M., Fisher, J.A., Jones, R.R., Parks, C.G., Hofmann, J.N., Sandler, D.P., Beane Freeman, L., Ward, M.H., 2022. Drinking water sources and water quality in a prospective agricultural cohort. Environ Epidemiol 6 (3), e210. https://doi.org/10.1097/ee9.0000000000000210.
- Morton, L.M., Turner, J.J., Cerhan, J.R., Linet, M.S., Treseler, P.A., Clarke, C.A., Jack, A., Cozen, W., Maynadi ´ e, M., Spinelli, J.J., Costantini, A.S., Rüdiger, T., Scarpa, A., Zheng, T., Weisenburger, D.D., 2007. Proposed classification of lymphoid neoplasms for epidemiologic research from the Pathology Working Group of the International Lymphoma Epidemiology Consortium (InterLymph). Blood 110 (2), 695 -708. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2006-11-051672.
- National Cancer Institute, 1982. National Cancer Institute sponsored Study of classifications of Non-Hodgkin ' s Lymphomas - summary and description of a working formulation for clinical usage. Cancer 49 (10), 2112 -2135. https://doi.org/ 10.1002/1097-0142(19820515)49:10 &lt; 2112::AID-CNCR2820491024 &gt; 3.0.CO;2-2.
- National Cancer Institute. SEER Lymphoma Subtype Recode ICD-O-3 (for cases diagnosed 2001 and forward). Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program. https://seer.cancer.gov/lymphomarecode/lymphoma-orig.html.
- ¨ Onfelt, A., Klasterska, I., 1984. Sister-chromatid exchanges and thioguanine resistance in v79 Chinese hamster cells after treatment with the aneuploidy-inducing agent carbaryl + /- S9 mix. Mutat. Res. 125, 269 -274. https://doi.org/10.1016/0027-5107 (84)90076-9.
- Piel, C., Pouchieu, C., Migault, L., Beziat, B., Boulanger, M., Bureau, M., Carles, C., Gruber, A., Lecluse, Y., Rondeau, V., Schwall, X., Tual, S., Lebailly, P., Baldi, I., group, A., 2019. Increased risk of central nervous system tumours with carbamate insecticide use in the prospective cohort AGRICAN. Int. J. Epidemiol. 48 (2), 512 -526. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyy246.
- Renglin, A., Harmala-Brasken, A.-S., Eriksson, J.E., Onfelt, A., 1999. Mitotic aberrations induced by carbaryl reflect tyrosine kinase inhibition with coincident up-regulation of serine/threonine protein phosphatase activity: implications for coordination of karyokinesis and cytokinesis. Mutagenesis 14 (3), 327 -333. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/mutage/14.3.327.
- Saramaki, O., Visakorpi, T., 2007. Chromosomal aberrations in prostate cancer. Front. Biosci. 12, 3287 -3301. https://doi.org/10.2741/2312.
- Shah, S.C., Boffetta, P., Johnson, K.C., Hu, J., Palli, D., Ferraroni, M., Tsugane, S., Hamada, G.S., Hidaka, A., Zaridze, D., Maximovich, D., Vioque, J., NavarreteMunoz, E.M., Zhang, Z.-F., Mu, L., Boccia, S., Pastorino, R., Kurtz, R.C., Rota, M., Bonzi, R., Negri, E., La Vecchia, C., Pelucchi, C., Hashim, D., 2020. Occupational exposures and odds of gastric cancer: a StoP project consortium pooled analysis. Int. J. Epidemiol. 49 (2), 422 -434. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyz263.
- Smith, M.T., Guyton, K.Z., Gibbons, C.F., Fritz, J.M., Portier, C.J., Rusyn, I., DeMarini, D. M., Caldwell, J.C., Kavlock, R.J., Lambert, P.F., Hecht, S.S., Bucher, J.R., Stewart, B. W., Baan, R.A., Cogliano, V.J., Straif, K., 2016. Key characteristics of carcinogens as a basis for organizing data on mechanisms of carcinogenesis. Environ. Health Perspect. 124 (6), 713 -721. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1509912.
- Tange, S., Fujimoto, N., Uramaru, N., Wong, F.F., Sugihara, K., Ohta, S., Kitamura, S., 2016. In vitro metabolism of methiocarb and carbaryl in rats, and its effect on their estrogenic and antiandrogenic activities. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 41, 289 -297. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.etap.2015.08.014.

- Thomas, K.W., Dosemeci, M., Coble, J.B., Hoppin, J.A., Sheldon, L.S., Chapa, G., Croghan, C.W., Jones, P.A., Knott, C.E., Lynch, C.F., Sandler, D.P., Blair, A.E., Alavanja, M.C., 2010. Assessment of a pesticide exposure intensity algorithm in the agricultural health study. J. Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. 20 (6), 559 -569. https:// doi.org/10.1038/jes.2009.54.
- United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2008. Amended Reregistration Eligibility Decision (RED) for Carbaryl (EPA-738-R-08-010). https://archive.epa.gov /pesticides/reregistration/web/pdf/carbaryl-red-amended.pdf.
- United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2020. Carbaryl: National and State Summary Use and Usage Matrix. https://www3.epa.gov/pesticides/nas/carbaryl/ appendix-1-4.pdf.
- United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2021. Carbaryl: Revised Draft Human Health Risk Assessment in Support of Registration Review. https://www.regulations. gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPP-2010-0230-0074.
- Wang, Z., Lin, Y., Jiang, Y., Fu, R., Wang, Y., Zhang, Q., 2022. The associations between thyroid-related hormones and the risk of thyroid cancer: an overall and doseresponse meta-analysis. Front. Endocrinol. 13, 992566. https://doi.org/10.3389/ fendo.2022.992566.
- Ward, M., Jones, R., Brender, J., De Kok, T., Weyer, P., Nolan, B., Villanueva, C., Van Breda, S., 2018. Drinking water nitrate and human health: an updated review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Publ. Health 15 (7), 1557. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15071557.