## ORIGINAL PAPER

## Body mass index, agricultural pesticide use, and cancer incidence in the Agricultural Health Study cohort

Gabriella Andreotti • Lifang Hou • Laura E. Beane Freeman Rajeev Mahajan • Stella Koutros • Joseph Coble • Jay Lubin • Aaron Blair • Jane A. Hoppin • Michael Alavanja

•

Received: 29 December 2009 / Accepted: 3 June 2010 / Published online: 22 August 2010 /C211 US Government 2010

Abstract Obesity is associated with increased risks of several cancers including colon and female breast. Pesticide use in agricultural populations has also been linked with higher risks of various cancers. However, the interaction between obesity and pesticide use on cancer risk has not been well studied. Using data from the Agricultural Health Study, we examined the association between body mass index (BMI) and the risk of cancer at 17 sites and the interaction between BMI and pesticide use. Pesticide applicators residing in Iowa and North Carolina and their spouses were enrolled between 1993 and 1997 and given a self-administered questionnaire to obtain pesticide use and other information. This analysis included 39,628 men and 28,319 women with height and weight data who were cancer-free at enrollment. Among these participants, 4,432 were diagnosed with cancer between enrollment and 2005 and 64% were overweight or obese. BMI (per 1 kg/m 2 ) was positively

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s10552-010-9603-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

- G. Andreotti ( &amp; ) /C1 L. Hou /C1 L. E. Beane Freeman /C1
- R. Mahajan /C1 S. Koutros /C1 J. Coble /C1 J. Lubin /C1 A. Blair /C1
- M. Alavanja Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer

Institute, National Institutes of Health, DHHS, 6120 Executive Blvd., EPS 8011, MSC 7240, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA e-mail: andreotg@mail.nih.gov

## L. Hou

Department of Preventive Medicine &amp; Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA

## J. A. Hoppin

Epidemiology Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, NIH, DHHS, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA

associated with colon cancer in men (hazard ratio (HR) 1.05, 95%confidence interval (CI) 1.02-1.09) and breast cancer in postmenopausal women (HR 1.03, 95% CI 1.01-1.06). In contrast, BMI was inversely associated with lung cancer in men, with a significant association in ever smokers (HR 0.92, 95% CI 0.88-0.97) and a null association in never smokers. The positive association between BMI and colon cancer in men was significant in those who ever used carbofuran (HR = 1.10, 95% CI 1.04-1.17; p -interaction = metolachlor (HR = 1.09, 95% CI 1.04-1.15; p -interaction = 0.02) but was null in non-users of these pesticides. Among male ever smokers, the inverse association between BMI and lung cancer was significant in non-users of carbofuran (HR = 0.87, 95% CI = 0.82-0.92) but was null in users of carbofuran ( p -interaction = 0.02). These findings suggest that certain pesticides may modify the effects of BMI on the risks of colon and lung cancers.

Keywords Obesity /C1 Body mass index /C1 Pesticides /C1 Cancer /C1 Agriculture

## Introduction

The prevalence of obesity in the United States has doubled since the 1980s. Currently, one-third of US adults are obese and another third are overweight [1]. Obesity has been associated with higher risks of several cancers, including colon, lower esophagus, kidney, gallbladder, female breast, and endometrium [2-4]. The association between obesity and cancer is likely linked to several related factors including diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, low physical activity, and a high-fat diet, [4] and involves several possible biological mechanisms such as increased

<!-- image -->

availability of growth and sex hormones, increased insulin, inflammation, altered immunity, cell proliferation, and angiogenesis [2, 4, 5].

Excess cancer rates, particularly for prostate, lymphohematopoetic, brain, stomach, and soft-tissue tumors have been reported among agricultural workers and pesticide applicators and manufacturers around the world [6-10]. Several epidemiological studies have reported associations between specific pesticides and increased cancer risks [11, 12]. It has been suggested that lipophilic pesticides may increase cancer risk via their persistent accumulation in adipose tissue, slow release into the blood and peripheral tissues, and eventual impact on the endocrine system [13-15]. Organochlorines are the only class of pesticides considered to be lipophilic as they are hydrophobic and accumulate in animal and human adipose tissue, although certain pesticides in other classes may have lipophilic properties [13, 15]. Because of the accumulation of lipophilic pesticides in adipose tissue, there is speculation that obese persons may have a greater capacity to accumulate and a higher body burden of these contaminants [16, 17]. Non-lipophilic pesticides have been linked to cancer via pathways closely related to obesity such as hormones and oxidative stress [18, 19]. Furthermore, laboratory studies have reported that toxicants such as pesticides may contribute to obesity [20-22]. Together, these factors support the possibility of a joint effect of pesticides and obesity on cancer risk, but this has not been well studied in humans. In this analysis, we examine the association between body mass index (BMI) and the risk of cancer at 17 sites, as well as the interaction between BMI and pesticide use, in a population of US private applicators (mostly farmers), commercial pesticide applicators, and spouses.

## Materials and methods

## Study subjects

Details of the Agricultural Health Study (AHS) have been previously reported [23]. Briefly, the AHS cohort is composed of over 89,000 participants, including licensed private pesticide applicators and their spouses residing in Iowa and North Carolina, and commercial applicators residing in Iowa. In total, 57,310, or 82%, of applicators seeking pesticide licensing in each state, were enrolled in the study between 13 December 1993 and 31 December 1997. In addition, spouses of enrolled private applicators were asked to participate, and a total of 32,346, or 75%, chose to participate. The study protocol was approved by all appropriate institutional review boards.

<!-- image -->

## Data ascertainment

At enrollment, applicators completed a self-administered questionnaire collecting information on demographics, lifestyle factors, medical histories, ever/never use of 50 pesticides, and detailed use information (number of days and years pesticides were applied, use of personal protective equipment, and application methods) on 22 of the 50 pesticides. A self-administered take-home questionnaire was given to all enrolled applicators to collect additional information, including weight, height, and detailed use on the other 28 pesticides; this questionnaire was returned by 44% of the enrolled applicators. No meaningful differences were found between applicators who completed and did not complete the take-home questionnaire [24]. For spouses, information on demographics, lifestyle factors, medical histories, height/weight, and ever/never use of the same 50 pesticides was primarily obtained from a self-administered questionnaire (81%) at enrollment and a follow-up telephone interview (19%).

Of all enrolled participants, 43% were missing height and weight data. To supplement these missing data, two additional sources, primarily the 5-year follow-up phone interview as well as driver's license data from 1985, were used. In Iowa, drivers' licenses contain height and weight information, while in North Carolina they contain only height. After using these additional sources, and removing subjects with implausible BMI values ( \ 11 or [ 70 kg/m 2 ), we had height and weight data on 67,947 participants (76% of total cohort). Among these participants, 64.6% reported weight at enrollment. For the remaining subjects, weight at enrollment was estimated from the 5-year follow-up and/or driver's license data using a regression model designed to estimate weight at the time of enrollment. Among the participants, 16.2% had weight estimated using only the 5-year follow-up and 19.1% using both 5-year follow-up and driver's license data. Data from the 5-year follow-up interview was also used to obtain the most current menopause status of female participants. Questionnaires are available on the AHS website (www.aghealth.org/ questionnaires.html).

## Cancer identification

Cancer cases were identified using population-based state cancer registries. Only incident cancer cases diagnosed between enrollment and 31 December 2005 (median follow-up of over 10 years) were included, and participants with any type of cancer diagnosed prior to enrollment were excluded from the analysis. Vital status was obtained from the state death registries and the National Death Index. Participants who moved out of North Carolina or Iowa (based on address information from Internal Revenue

Service records) were not followed for cancer occurrence after moving, and follow-up times were censored at date of exit from the state.

## Statistical analysis

For this study, we included participants with weight and height data, which totaled 38,190 private applicators, 2,325 commercial applicators, and 27,432 spouses. BMI was calculated as weight (kg) divided by the square of height (m 2 ) and grouped as follows: underweight ( \ 18.5 kg/m 2 ), normal (18.5-24.9 kg/m 2 ), overweight (25-29.9 kg/m 2 ), obese I (30.0-34.9 kg/m 2 ), and obese II/III ( C 35 kg/m 2 ) [25]. The chi-square test was used to assess statistically significant differences between BMI groups and selected characteristics.

Associations between BMI and cancer were evaluated separately by sex due to the differences in risk factors for cancer between sexes. There were a sufficient number of cases (at least 10 for each sex) to examine 17 cancer sites. Hazard rate ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) were calculated using a Cox proportional-hazard regression model using age at enrollment and age at exit [minimum of: cancer diagnosis, death, or end of follow-up (31 December 2005)] as the start and end of follow-up, respectively. A backward elimination procedure was conducted in order to determine the most parsimonious model for each of the 17 cancers evaluated. Initially, models included the following potential confounding factors: race (white, other), state of residence (Iowa, North Carolina), education (high school or lower, greater than high school), smoking status (never, former, current), alcohol intake in past 12 months (no, yes), hypertension (no, yes), diabetes (no, yes), family history of cancer (no, yes), meat intake ( B 3 per month, 1-2 per week C 3 per week), fruit intake ( \ 1 per day, 1-2 per day, C 3 per day), vegetable intake ( \ 1 per day, 1-2 per day, C 3 per day), vitamin supplement (no, yes-not regularly, yes-regularly), and leisure-time exercise (0, \ 1, 1-2, 3-5, [ 5 h per week), as well as menopause status at the follow-up interview (pre, post) and parity (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, [ 4) for women. Iteratively, the factor with the highest p -value above 0.05 was removed from the model until only those factors that contributed 10% or more change in the HR remained. We also examined associations between BMI and cancer using a linear test of trend with a continuous BMI variable (per 1 kg/m 2 ).

For the interaction between BMI and pesticide use, we examined pesticides used by at least 10% of male participants (36 pesticides: 16 insecticides, 17 herbicides, 2 fungicides, 1 fumigant) and 10% of female participants (5 pesticides: 3 insecticides, 2 herbicides). We examined use of any organochlorine insecticide (aldrin, chlordane, DDT, dieldrin, heptachlor, lindane, toxaphene) and any organophosphate insecticide (chlorpyrifos, coumaphos, diazinon, dichlorvos, fonofos, malathion, parathion, phorate, terbufos, trichlorofon). The cancer sites examined were those with at least 100 cases per sex (bladder, colon, lung, melanoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, prostate, and rectal for men; and breast and colon for women). Tests of interaction between ever/never pesticide use and continuous BMI were conducted using a cross-product interaction term in the Cox regression model. We calculated HRs and 95% CIs for cancer risk in relation to BMI ( \ 25, 25-29.9, and C 30 kg/m 2 ) stratified by ever/never use of each pesticide using a Cox regression model with the appropriate adjustments for each cancer. Associations with less than five exposed subjects per BMI category were not evaluated. SAS version 9.1 (Cary, NC) and the AHS data release PIREL0612 were used to conduct all analyses.

## Results

Of the 67,947 subjects, 0.8% were underweight, 34.8% were normal, 43% were overweight, 16.7% were moderately obese (obese I), and 4.7% were highly obese (obese II/III) (Table 1). Compared to normal weight subjects, underweight subjects were more likely to be women, young ( \ 40 years) or old ( C 70 years), current smokers, never alcohol drinkers, non-hypertensive, high fruit consumers ( C 3 servings/day), and do no or little exercise. In contrast, compared to normal weight subjects, overweight or obese subjects were more likely to be men, middle-aged (40-69), lower educated (high school or less), former smokers, hypertensive, diabetic, low fruit and vegetable consumers, take no vitamin supplements, and do no or little exercise.

We found a statistically significant positive trend for BMI (per 1 kg/m 2 ) and colon cancer among men (HR 1.05, 95% CI 1.02-1.09; p -trend = 0.005) adjusting for race, education, and family history of colon cancer (Table 2). Overweight men had a 1.25-fold (95% CI = 0.85-1.85), obese I men a 1.88-fold (95% CI = 1.22-2.91), and obese II/III men a 2.03-fold 95% CI = 1.05-3.93) risk of colon cancer compared to normal weight men, with a significant test of trend ( p -trend = 0.005). For rectal cancer, obese II/ III men had a 3.21-fold (95% CI = 1.34-7.71) risk compared to normal weight men adjusting for meat consumption, but the test of trend was borderline statistically significant ( p -trend = 0.06). We observed increased, but not statistically significant, risks of stomach and bladder cancers with higher BMI among men. In contrast, the risks of lung and oral cancers decreased with higher BMI. Stratifying by smoking status, we found a statistically significant inverse association between BMI (per 1 kg/m 2 ) and lung cancer among ever smokers (HR = 0.92, 95% CI = 0.88-0.97, p -trend = 0.001) adjusting for state, race,

<!-- image -->

Table 1 Distribution of study population by BMI categories and selected characteristics

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 1 Distribution of study population by BMI categories and selected characteristics</div></caption><tbody><tr><td>Characteristics</td><th colspan="2">Total</th><th colspan="2">Underweight (BMI \ 18.5 kg/m 2 )</th><th colspan="2">Normal Weight (BMI 18.5-24.9 kg/m 2 )</th><th colspan="2">Overweight (BMI 25-29.9 kg/m 2 )</th><th colspan="2">Obese I (BMI 30-34.9 kg/m 2 )</th><th colspan="2">Obese II ? III (BMI C 35 kg/m 2 )</th></tr><tr><td></td><th>n</th><th>%</th><th>n</th><th>%</th><th>n</th><th>%</th><th>n</th><th>%</th><th>n</th><th>%</th><th>n</th><th>%</th></tr><tr><th>All subjects</th><td>67,947</td><td>100.0</td><td>513</td><td>0.8</td><td>23,620</td><td>34.8</td><td>29,235</td><td>43.0</td><td>11,356</td><td>16.7</td><td>3,223</td><td>4.7</td></tr><tr><th>Sex</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Male</th><td>39,628</td><td>58.3</td><td>81</td><td>15.8</td><td>10,108</td><td>42.8</td><td>20,151</td><td>68.9</td><td>7,460</td><td>65.7</td><td>1,828</td><td>56.7</td></tr><tr><th>Female</th><td>28,319</td><td>41.7</td><td>432</td><td>84.2</td><td>13,512</td><td>57.2</td><td>9,084</td><td>31.1</td><td>3,896</td><td>34.3</td><td>1,395</td><td>43.3</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td></tr><tr><th>Age (years)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 40</th><td>21,122</td><td>31.1</td><td>240</td><td>46.8</td><td>8,853</td><td>37.5</td><td>8,208</td><td>28.1</td><td>2,934</td><td>25.8</td><td>887</td><td>27.5</td></tr><tr><th>40-49</th><td>19,116</td><td>28.1</td><td>110</td><td>21.4</td><td>6,169</td><td>26.1</td><td>8,233</td><td>28.2</td><td>3,509</td><td>30.9</td><td>1,095</td><td>34.0</td></tr><tr><th>50-59</th><td>15,398</td><td>22.7</td><td>77</td><td>15.0</td><td>4,561</td><td>19.3</td><td>7,004</td><td>24.0</td><td>2,925</td><td>25.8</td><td>831</td><td>25.8</td></tr><tr><th>60-69</th><td>9,619</td><td>14.2</td><td>50</td><td>9.8</td><td>2,943</td><td>12.5</td><td>4,628</td><td>15.8</td><td>1,647</td><td>14.5</td><td>351</td><td>10.9</td></tr><tr><th>70 ?</th><td>2,692</td><td>4.0</td><td>36</td><td>7.0</td><td>1,094</td><td>4.6</td><td>1,162</td><td>4.0</td><td>341</td><td>3.0</td><td>59</td><td>1.8</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td></tr><tr><th>Race</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>White</th><td>65,150</td><td>98.0</td><td>491</td><td>98.0</td><td>22,836</td><td>98.6</td><td>28,038</td><td>98.1</td><td>10,761</td><td>97.1</td><td>3,024</td><td>95.8</td></tr><tr><th>Other</th><td>1,338</td><td>2.0</td><td>10</td><td>2.0</td><td>319</td><td>1.4</td><td>554</td><td>1.9</td><td>322</td><td>2.9</td><td>133</td><td>4.2</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.24</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>0.0003</td></tr><tr><th>Residence</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Iowa</th><td>45,158</td><td>66.5</td><td>281</td><td>54.8</td><td>15,708</td><td>66.5</td><td>19,569</td><td>66.9</td><td>7,508</td><td>66.1</td><td>2,092</td><td>64.9</td></tr><tr><th>North Carolina</th><td>22,789</td><td>33.5</td><td>232</td><td>45.2</td><td>7,912</td><td>33.5</td><td>9,666</td><td>33.1</td><td>3,848</td><td>33.9</td><td>1,131</td><td>36.4</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>0.29</td><td></td><td>0.11</td><td></td><td>0.20</td></tr><tr><th>Participant type</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Private applicator</th><td>38,190</td><td>56.2</td><td>88</td><td>17.2</td><td>9,873</td><td>41.8</td><td>19,307</td><td>66.0</td><td>7,170</td><td>63.1</td><td>1,752</td><td>54.4</td></tr><tr><th>Commercial applicator</th><td>2,325</td><td>3.4</td><td>10</td><td>2.0</td><td>671</td><td>2.8</td><td>1,103</td><td>3.8</td><td>422</td><td>3.7</td><td>119</td><td>3.7</td></tr><tr><th>Spouse</th><td>27,432</td><td>40.4</td><td>415</td><td>80.9</td><td>13,076</td><td>55.4</td><td>8,825</td><td>30.2</td><td>3,764</td><td>33.2</td><td>1,352</td><td>41.9</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td></tr><tr><th>Education</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>High school or lower</th><td>32,722</td><td>51.9</td><td>201</td><td>43.0</td><td>10,077</td><td>46.4</td><td>14,846</td><td>54.3</td><td>5,904</td><td>56.0</td><td>1,694</td><td>57.3</td></tr><tr><th>Greater than high school</th><td>30,284</td><td>48.1</td><td>267</td><td>57.1</td><td>11,620</td><td>53.6</td><td>12,488</td><td>45.7</td><td>4,645</td><td>44.0</td><td>1,264</td><td>42.7</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.13</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>0.004</td><td></td><td>0.17</td></tr><tr><th>Smoking status</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Never</th><td>40,203</td><td>61.4</td><td>313</td><td>64.7</td><td>14,737</td><td>64.9</td><td>16,816</td><td>59.5</td><td>6,453</td><td>59.0</td><td>1,884</td><td>60.7</td></tr><tr><th>Former</th><td>16,661</td><td>25.4</td><td>61</td><td>12.6</td><td>4,598</td><td>20.3</td><td>7,871</td><td>27.9</td><td>3,239</td><td>29.6</td><td>892</td><td>28.8</td></tr><tr><th>Current</th><td>8,616</td><td>13.2</td><td>110</td><td>22.7</td><td>3,374</td><td>14.9</td><td>3,558</td><td>12.6</td><td>1,247</td><td>11.4</td><td>327</td><td>10.5</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>0.0001</td><td></td><td>0.20</td></tr><tr><th>Smoking pack-years</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>0</th><td>40,203</td><td>62.4</td><td>313</td><td>64.9</td><td>14,737</td><td>65.7</td><td>16,816</td><td>60.7</td><td>6,453</td><td>60.1</td><td>1,884</td><td>61.7</td></tr><tr><th>1-12</th><td>13,287</td><td>20.6</td><td>95</td><td>19.7</td><td>4,438</td><td>19.8</td><td>5,872</td><td>21.2</td><td>2,269</td><td>21.1</td><td>613</td><td>20.1</td></tr><tr><th>C 13</th><td>10,927</td><td>17.0</td><td>74</td><td>15.4</td><td>3,265</td><td>14.6</td><td>5,016</td><td>18.1</td><td>2,017</td><td>18.8</td><td>555</td><td>18.2</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.88</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>0.30</td><td></td><td>0.25</td></tr><tr><th>Number cigarettes per day</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>0</th><td>40,203</td><td>61.8</td><td>313</td><td>64.7</td><td>14,737</td><td>65.2</td><td>16,816</td><td>60.1</td><td>6,453</td><td>59.4</td><td>1,884</td><td>61.1</td></tr><tr><th>B 10</th><td>7,953</td><td>12.2</td><td>59</td><td>12.2</td><td>2,810</td><td>12.4</td><td>3,442</td><td>12.3</td><td>1,300</td><td>12.0</td><td>342</td><td>11.1</td></tr><tr><th>11-20</th><td>10,010</td><td>15.4</td><td>81</td><td>16.7</td><td>3,327</td><td>14.7</td><td>4,553</td><td>16.3</td><td>1,645</td><td>15.2</td><td>404</td><td>13.1</td></tr><tr><th>21-40</th><td>5,859</td><td>9.0</td><td>29</td><td>6.0</td><td>1,558</td><td>6.9</td><td>2,709</td><td>9.7</td><td>1,217</td><td>11.2</td><td>346</td><td>11.2</td></tr><tr><th>[ 40</th><td>982</td><td>1.5</td><td>2</td><td>0.4</td><td>162</td><td>0.7</td><td>470</td><td>1.7</td><td>242</td><td>2.2</td><td>106</td><td>3.4</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.64</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>0.0001</td></tr></tbody></table><!-- image -->

Table 1 continued

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 1 continued</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Characteristics</th><th colspan="2">Total</th><th colspan="2">Underweight (BMI \ 18.5 kg/m 2 )</th><th colspan="2">Normal Weight (BMI 18.5-24.9 kg/m 2 )</th><th colspan="2">Overweight (BMI 25-29.9 kg/m 2 )</th><th colspan="2">Obese I (BMI 30-34.9 kg/m 2 )</th><th colspan="2">Obese II ? III (BMI C 35 kg/m 2 )</th></tr><tr><td></td><th>n</th><th>%</th><th>n</th><th>%</th><th>n</th><th>%</th><th>n</th><th>%</th><th>n</th><th>%</th><th>n</th><th>%</th></tr><tr><th>Alcohol drinking year prior</th><th>enrollment</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>24,681</td><td>38.3</td><td>230</td><td>47.6</td><td>8,691</td><td>38.6</td><td>10,292</td><td>37.2</td><td>4,183</td><td>39.0</td><td>1,285</td><td>42.1</td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>39,813</td><td>61.7</td><td>253</td><td>52.4</td><td>13,856</td><td>61.5</td><td>17,384</td><td>62.8</td><td>6,551</td><td>61.0</td><td>1,769</td><td>57.9</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>0.01</td><td></td><td>0.001</td><td></td><td>0.002</td></tr><tr><th>Frequency of alcohol drinking year</th><th>prior</th><th>enrollment</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>None</th><td>24,681</td><td>38.3</td><td>230</td><td>47.6</td><td>8,691</td><td>38.6</td><td>10,292</td><td>37.2</td><td>4,183</td><td>39.0</td><td>1,285</td><td>42.1</td></tr><tr><th>1-5</th><td>21,352</td><td>33.1</td><td>172</td><td>35.6</td><td>7,873</td><td>34.9</td><td>8,747</td><td>31.6</td><td>3,499</td><td>32.6</td><td>1,061</td><td>34.7</td></tr><tr><th>C 6</th><td>18,461</td><td>28.6</td><td>81</td><td>16.8</td><td>5,983</td><td>26.5</td><td>8,637</td><td>31.2</td><td>3,052</td><td>28.4</td><td>708</td><td>23.2</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>0.002</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td></tr><tr><th>Ever diagnosed with hypertension</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>42,669</td><td>84.5</td><td>443</td><td>94.5</td><td>17,432</td><td>91.3</td><td>17,178</td><td>83.7</td><td>6,026</td><td>74.7</td><td>1,590</td><td>67.3</td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>7,849</td><td>15.5</td><td>26</td><td>5.5</td><td>1,660</td><td>8.7</td><td>3,346</td><td>16.3</td><td>2,045</td><td>25.3</td><td>772</td><td>32.7</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.02</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td></tr><tr><th>Ever diagnosed with diabetes</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>63,437</td><td>96.6</td><td>481</td><td>98.0</td><td>22,421</td><td>98.1</td><td>27,338</td><td>96.8</td><td>10,357</td><td>94.6</td><td>2,840</td><td>91.4</td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>2,202</td><td>3.4</td><td>10</td><td>2.0</td><td>423</td><td>1.9</td><td>907</td><td>3.2</td><td>596</td><td>5.4</td><td>266</td><td>8.6</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.76</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td></tr><tr><th>Family history of cancer</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>38,429</td><td>56.6</td><td>317</td><td>61.8</td><td>13,278</td><td>56.2</td><td>16,651</td><td>57.0</td><td>6,368</td><td>56.1</td><td>1,815</td><td>56.3</td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>29,518</td><td>43.4</td><td>196</td><td>38.2</td><td>10,342</td><td>43.8</td><td>12,584</td><td>43.0</td><td>4,988</td><td>43.9</td><td>1,408</td><td>43.7</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.01</td><td></td><td>0.09</td><td></td><td>0.11</td><td></td><td>0.81</td></tr><tr><th>Frequency of meat consumption</th><th>year prior</th><th>enrollment</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>B 3 times per month or less</th><td>3,032</td><td>6.6</td><td>46</td><td>10.4</td><td>1,309</td><td>7.8</td><td>1,179</td><td>6.2</td><td>410</td><td>5.5</td><td>88</td><td>4.1</td></tr><tr><th>1-2 times per week</th><td>23,055</td><td>50.1</td><td>228</td><td>51.7</td><td>8,899</td><td>52.7</td><td>9,518</td><td>49.9</td><td>3,439</td><td>46.0</td><td>971</td><td>45.1</td></tr><tr><th>C 3 times per week</th><td>19,931</td><td>43.3</td><td>167</td><td>37.9</td><td>6,676</td><td>39.5</td><td>8,364</td><td>43.9</td><td>3,628</td><td>48.5</td><td>1,096</td><td>50.9</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.11</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>0.04</td></tr><tr><th>Fruit consumption year prior</th><th>enrollment</th><th>(servings/day)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 1</th><td>37,401</td><td>62.1</td><td>270</td><td>59.3</td><td>11,796</td><td>57.8</td><td>16,952</td><td>64.5</td><td>6,609</td><td>64.8</td><td>1,774</td><td>62.1</td></tr><tr><th>1-2</th><td>20,323</td><td>33.8</td><td>150</td><td>33.0</td><td>7,559</td><td>37.0</td><td>8,433</td><td>32.1</td><td>3,222</td><td>31.6</td><td>959</td><td>33.6</td></tr><tr><th>C 3</th><td>2,488</td><td>4.1</td><td>35</td><td>7.7</td><td>1,064</td><td>5.2</td><td>898</td><td>3.4</td><td>366</td><td>3.6</td><td>125</td><td>4.4</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.03</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>0.50</td><td></td><td>0.01</td></tr><tr><th>Vegetable consumption year prior enrollment</th><td></td><td></td><th>(servings/day)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 1</th><td>26,255</td><td>43.7</td><td>187</td><td>41.1</td><td>8,264</td><td>40.6</td><td>11,985</td><td>45.7</td><td>4,612</td><td>45.3</td><td>1,207</td><td>42.3</td></tr><tr><th>1-2</th><td>28.693</td><td>47.8</td><td>212</td><td>46.6</td><td>10,136</td><td>49.8</td><td>12,238</td><td>46.7</td><td>4,733</td><td>46.5</td><td>1,374</td><td>48.1</td></tr><tr><th>C 3</th><td>5,129</td><td>8.5</td><td>56</td><td>12.3</td><td>1,974</td><td>9.7</td><td>1,997</td><td>7.6</td><td>829</td><td>8.2</td><td>273</td><td>9.6</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.13</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>0.20</td><td></td><td>0.02</td></tr><tr><th>Vitamin or mineral supplements</th><th>year prior</th><th>enrollment</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>25,002</td><td>54.9</td><td>187</td><td>43.0</td><td>8,064</td><td>48.2</td><td>10,908</td><td>56.0</td><td>4,560</td><td>61.5</td><td>1,283</td><td>60.0</td></tr><tr><th>Yes, not regularly</th><td>8,270</td><td>18.2</td><td>85</td><td>19.5</td><td>3,275</td><td>19.6</td><td>3,290</td><td>17.5</td><td>1,258</td><td>17.0</td><td>362</td><td>16.9</td></tr><tr><th>Yes, at least once/week</th><td>12,248</td><td>26.9</td><td>163</td><td>37.5</td><td>5,379</td><td>32.2</td><td>4,622</td><td>24.5</td><td>1,590</td><td>21.5</td><td>494</td><td>23.1</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.05</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>0.24</td></tr><tr><th>Strenuous leisure exercise</th><th>(hours/week) b</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>0</th><td>10,391</td><td>22.7</td><td>128</td><td>29.3</td><td>3,431</td><td>20.4</td><td>4,339</td><td>22.0</td><td>1,893</td><td>25.5</td><td>600</td><td>27.9</td></tr><tr><th>[ 0 and \ 1</th><td>7,988</td><td>17.5</td><td>66</td><td>15.1</td><td>2,684</td><td>16.0</td><td>3,405</td><td>18.0</td><td>1,367</td><td>18.4</td><td>466</td><td>21.7</td></tr><tr><th>1-2</th><td>8,270</td><td>18.1</td><td>81</td><td>18.5</td><td>3,106</td><td>18.5</td><td>3,429</td><td>18.1</td><td>1,299</td><td>17.5</td><td>355</td><td>16.5</td></tr><tr><th>3-5</th><td>10,241</td><td>22.4</td><td>80</td><td>18.3</td><td>4,214</td><td>25.1</td><td>4,030</td><td>21.3</td><td>1,533</td><td>20.6</td><td>384</td><td>17.9</td></tr><tr><th>[ 5</th><td>8,842</td><td>19.3</td><td>82</td><td>18.8</td><td>3,370</td><td>20.1</td><td>3,701</td><td>19.6</td><td>1,346</td><td>18.1</td><td>343</td><td>16.0</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>0.0004</td><td></td><td>0.0001</td></tr></tbody></table><!-- image -->

Table 1 continued

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 1 continued</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Characteristics</th><th colspan="2">Total</th><th colspan="2">Underweight (BMI \ 18.5 kg/m 2 )</th><th colspan="2">Normal Weight (BMI 18.5-24.9 kg/m 2 )</th><th colspan="2">Overweight (BMI 25-29.9 kg/m 2 )</th><th colspan="2">Obese I (BMI 30-34.9 kg/m 2 )</th><th colspan="2">Obese (BMI</th><td>? III 2</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>n</th><th>%</th><th>n</th><th>%</th><th>n</th><th>%</th><th>n</th><th>%</th><th>n</th><th>%</th><td>n</td><th>%</th></tr><tr><th colspan="7">Lifetime pesticide use (days) c</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>0</th><td>11,947</td><td>19.7</td><td>206</td><td>46.7</td><td>5,750</td><td>27.8</td><td>3,763</td><td>14.2</td><td>1,635</td><td>16.0</td><td>593</td><td>20.8</td></tr><tr><th>1-50</th><td>13,149</td><td>21.7</td><td>112</td><td>25.4</td><td>5,126</td><td>24.8</td><td>5,382</td><td>20.3</td><td>1,969</td><td>19.3</td><td>560</td><td>19.6</td></tr><tr><th>51-178</th><td>13,114</td><td>21.6</td><td>62</td><td>14.1</td><td>4,003</td><td>19.3</td><td>6,213</td><td>23.5</td><td>2,258</td><td>22.2</td><td>578</td><td>20.2</td></tr><tr><th>179-369</th><td>10,680</td><td>17.6</td><td>27</td><td>6.1</td><td>2,910</td><td>14.1</td><td>5,275</td><td>19.9</td><td>1,983</td><td>19.5</td><td>485</td><td>17.0</td></tr><tr><th>C 370 p -value a</th><td>11,787</td><td>19.4</td><td>34</td><td>7.7</td><td>2,924</td><td>14.1 \ .0001</td><td>5,838</td><td>22.1 \ .0001</td><td>2,351</td><td>23.1 \ .0001</td><td>640</td><td>22.4 \ .0001</td></tr><tr><th colspan="13">Menopause status d</th></tr><tr><th>Premenopausal</th><td>12,107</td><td>45.4</td><td>222</td><td>57.7</td><td>6,467</td><td>51.4</td><td>3,380</td><td>39.5</td><td>1,410</td><td>38.4</td><td>534</td><td>40.7</td></tr><tr><th>Postmenopausal p -value a</th><td>14,584</td><td>54.6</td><td>163</td><td>42.3</td><td>6,117</td><td>48.6 0.02</td><td>5,166</td><td>60.5 \ .0001</td><td>2,261</td><td>61.6 0.24</td><td>779</td><td>59.3 0.15</td></tr><tr><th colspan="13">Parity</th></tr><tr><th>0</th><td>262</td><td>1.6</td><td>6</td><td>2.4</td><td>141</td><td>1.8</td><td>72</td><td>1.4</td><td>32</td><td>1.4</td><td>11</td><td>1.3</td></tr><tr><th>1</th><td>1,922</td><td>11.5</td><td>55</td><td>21.7</td><td>1,015</td><td>12.7</td><td>516</td><td>9.6</td><td>234</td><td>10.2</td><td>102</td><td>12.3</td></tr><tr><th>2</th><td>5,989</td><td>35.9</td><td>100</td><td>39.4</td><td>3,066</td><td>38.5</td><td>1,833</td><td>34.3</td><td>722</td><td>31.4</td><td>268</td><td>32.3</td></tr><tr><th>3</th><td>4,802</td><td>28.7</td><td>61</td><td>24.0</td><td>2,236</td><td>28.1</td><td>1,601</td><td>29.9</td><td>675</td><td>29.3</td><td>229</td><td>27.6</td></tr><tr><th>4</th><td>2,293</td><td>13.7</td><td>21</td><td>8.3</td><td>981</td><td>12.3</td><td>785</td><td>14.7</td><td>380</td><td>16.5</td><td>126</td><td>15.2</td></tr><tr><th>[ 4</th><td>1,438</td><td>8.6</td><td>11</td><td>4.3</td><td>529</td><td>6.6</td><td>544</td><td>10.2</td><td>259</td><td>11.3</td><td>95</td><td>11.4</td></tr><tr><th>p -value a</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.001</td><td></td><td>\ .0001</td><td></td><td>0.08</td><td></td><td>0.55</td></tr></tbody></table>a Chi square p -value comparing distribution of underweight to normal weight, overweight to normal, moderate obese to overweight, and highly obese to moderate obese, respectively b Summer and winter exercise combined

c Includes any pesticide use

d Menopause status based on Phase II questionnaire data vegetable consumption, exercise, and pack-years of cigarette smoking. Among male never smokers, the association between BMI (per 1 kg/m 2 ) and lung cancer was null (HR = 0.98, 95% CI = 0.86-1.11, p -trend = 0.70) adjusting for state, however, there were only 21 men with lung cancer who never smoked, thus risk estimates for this group are unstable. The test of interaction between BMI and smoking status was not statistically significant ( p = 0.54). In order to rule out the possibility of weight loss due to preclinical disease, we restricted the cases of lung cancer among ever smokers to those diagnosed 5 years after enrollment and found that the statistically significant inverse association with BMI remained (5 years: HR = 0.93; 95% CI = 0.88-0.99, p -trend = 0.02).

Among women, we found statistically significant positive trend associations for BMI and all cancer sites combined (HR = 1.02, 95% CI = 1.01-1.04; p -trend = 0.002) adjusting for smoking status, hypertension, taking vitamin supplements, and parity, and specifically for postmenopausal breast cancer (HR = 1.03, 95% CI = 1.01-1.05; p -trend = 0.02) adjusting for diabetes, vitamin supplement, parity, and family history of breast cancer. For breast cancer, overweight postmenopausal women had a 1.22-fold

<!-- image -->

(95% CI 0.93-1.60), obese I a 1.62-fold (95% CI 1.17-2.24), and obese II/III a 1.07-fold (95% CI 0.61-1.87) risk compared to normal weight postmenopausal women. To explore the null association for breast cancer in obese II/III women, we compared the frequency of the factors in Table 1 between the obese I and II postmenopausal women using the chi-square test and found that only alcohol consumption was significantly different ( p = 0.02), with 50% of the obese II versus 26% of the obese I women ever drinking alcohol. Stratifying by alcohol consumption, the test for trend for BMI and breast cancer among postmenopausal women was statistically significant among those who never drank alcohol (HR = 1.05, 95% CI = 1.02-1.08, p -trend = 0.003), but not among those who drank alcohol (HR = 1.00, 95% CI = 0.95-1.04, p -trend = 0.85). The test for interaction between BMI and alcohol drinking was statistically significant ( p -interaction = 0.01). In addition to breast cancer, women with higher BMI had increased, but not statistically significant, risks of pancreatic and kidney cancers, and melanoma. BMI was not associated with colon cancer in women (HR = 1.00, 95% CI 0.96-1.04, p -trend = 0.92). The risk of lung cancer decreased with increasing BMI, but the test of trend was not statistically

Table 2 Hazard rate ratio (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for cancers in relation to BMI at enrollment by sex

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 2 Hazard rate ratio (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for cancers in relation to BMI at enrollment by sex</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Cancer</th><th colspan="4">Men</th><th colspan="3">Women</th></tr><tr><th>BMI (kg/m 2 )</th><th>n</th><th>HR a</th><th>95% CI a</th><td></td><th>n</th><th>HR a</th><th>95% CI a</th></tr><tr><td>All cancers b</td><td>2,955</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>1,477</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>4</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>20</td><td>0.98</td><td>0.52-1.84</td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>724</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>608</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>1,559</td><td>1.06</td><td>0.95-1.19</td><td></td><td>516</td><td>1.14</td><td>0.89-1.33</td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>556</td><td>1.04</td><td>0.90-1.20</td><td></td><td>240</td><td>1.28</td><td>1.05-1.56</td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>112</td><td>1.12</td><td>0.87-1.45</td><td></td><td>93</td><td>1.36</td><td>1.01-1.82</td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.01</td><td>0.99-1.02</td><td>0.24</td><td></td><td>1.02</td><td>1.01-1.04 0.002</td></tr><tr><td>Oral, Larynx, Pharynx c</td><td>74</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>14</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>24</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>61</td><td>1.30</td><td>0.79-2.13</td><td></td><td>7</td><td>1.35</td><td>0.43-4.21</td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>13</td><td>0.69</td><td>0.34-1.44</td><td></td><td>3</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>2</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>0.97</td><td>0.92-1.02</td><td>0.25</td><td></td><td>1.00</td><td>0.89-1.11 0.93</td></tr><tr><td>Lung d</td><td>261</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>96</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>2</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>86</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>47</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>127</td><td>0.85</td><td>0.60-1.20</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.63-1.55</td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>40</td><td>0.85</td><td>0.54-1.35</td><td></td><td>33 10</td><td>0.99 0.67</td><td>0.33-1.38</td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>6</td><td>0.47</td><td>0.15-1.49</td><td></td><td>4</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>0.97</td><td>0.93-1.01</td><td>0.15</td><td></td><td>0.98</td><td>0.94-1.03 0.51</td></tr><tr><td>Lung (Ever smokers) e</td><td>228</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>64</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>78</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>30</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>108</td><td>0.62</td><td>0.43-0.90</td><td></td><td>22</td><td>1.01</td><td>0.58-1.75</td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>35</td><td>0.56</td><td>0.35-0.92</td><td></td><td>8</td><td>0.87</td><td>0.40-1.90</td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>6</td><td>0.22</td><td>0.05-0.90</td><td></td><td>3</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>0.92</td><td>0.88-0.97</td><td>0.001</td><td></td><td>0.99</td><td>0.94-1.05 0.70</td></tr><tr><td>Lung (Never smokers) f</td><td>21</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>30</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>4</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>17</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>14</td><td>2.03</td><td>0.66-6.24</td><td></td><td>11</td><td>0.74</td><td>0.35-1.59</td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>2</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>0.98</td><td>0.86-1.11</td><td>0.70</td><td></td><td>0.92</td><td>0.84-1.01 0.09</td></tr><tr><td>Thyroid g</td><td>27</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>38</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>8</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>13</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>15</td><td>0.92</td><td>0.38-2.20</td><td></td><td>18</td><td>1.71</td><td>0.82-3.57</td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>4</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>1.08</td><td>0.38-3.09</td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>0.94</td><td>0.85-1.05</td><td>0.29</td><td></td><td>1.04</td><td>0.16</td></tr><tr><td>Esophagus h</td><td>39</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.98-1.11</td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>23</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>1 0</td><td>- -</td><td>- -</td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>9</td><td>2.09</td><td>0.84-5.15</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr></tbody></table><!-- image -->

Table 2 continued

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 2 continued</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Cancer</th><th colspan="4">Men</th><th colspan="4">Women</th></tr><tr><th>BMI (kg/m 2 )</th><th>n</th><th>HR a</th><th colspan="2">95% CI a</th><th>n</th><th>HR a</th><th colspan="2">95% CI a</th></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.01</td><td>0.94-1.10</td><td>0.73</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Stomach i</td><td>41</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>13</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>10</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>5</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>18</td><td>0.96</td><td>0.44-2.10</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>1.38</td><td>0.42-4.53</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>10</td><td>1.61</td><td>0.66-3.91</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>3</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.07</td><td>0.99-1.14</td><td>0.06</td><td></td><td>0.95</td><td>0.83-1.08</td><td>0.41</td></tr><tr><td>Pancreatic j</td><td>45</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>21</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>11</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>24</td><td>1.11</td><td>0.54-2.27</td><td></td><td>7</td><td>1.30</td><td>0.43-3.90</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>8</td><td>1.06</td><td>0.42-2.65</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>2.48</td><td>0.79-7.83</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>0.99</td><td>0.92-1.07</td><td>0.83</td><td></td><td>1.06</td><td>0.98-1.15</td><td>0.15</td></tr><tr><td>Kidney k</td><td>78</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>28</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>19</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>11</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>35</td><td>0.66</td><td>0.33-1.30</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>0.51</td><td>0.18-1.50</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>21</td><td>0.72</td><td>0.31-1.70</td><td></td><td>11</td><td>2.30</td><td>0.96-5.49</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>3</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.00</td><td>0.93-1.08</td><td>0.91</td><td></td><td>1.02</td><td>0.95-1.10</td><td>0.61</td></tr><tr><td>Bladder l</td><td>131</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>17</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>34</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>7</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>66</td><td>1.16</td><td>0.75-1.81</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>0.97</td><td>0.32-2.89</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>28</td><td>1.41</td><td>0.82-2.41</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>3</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.01</td><td>0.96-1.05</td><td>0.82</td><td></td><td>0.93</td><td>0.83-1.05</td><td>0.23</td></tr><tr><td>Prostate m</td><td>1,274</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>308</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>696</td><td>1.05</td><td>0.92-1.21</td><td></td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>226</td><td>0.99</td><td>0.83-1.18</td><td></td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>44</td><td>0.91</td><td>0.66-1.26</td><td></td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.00</td><td>0.98-1.01</td><td>0.65</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Colon n</td><td>230</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>113</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>44</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>40</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>112</td><td>1.25</td><td>0.85-1.85</td><td></td><td>49</td><td>1.48</td><td>0.97-2.26</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>58</td><td>1.88</td><td>1.22-2.91</td><td></td><td>19</td><td>1.36</td><td>0.79-2.36</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>15</td><td>2.03</td><td>1.05-3.93</td><td></td><td>4</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.05</td><td>1.02-1.09</td><td>0.005</td><td></td><td>1.00</td><td>0.96-1.04</td><td>0.92</td></tr><tr><td>Rectal o</td><td>102</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>34</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>23</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>15</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr></tbody></table><!-- image -->

Table 2 continued

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 2 continued</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Cancer</th><th colspan="4">Men</th><th colspan="4">Women</th></tr><tr><th>BMI (kg/m 2 )</th><th>n</th><th>HR a</th><th>95% CI a</th><td></td><th>n</th><th>HR a</th><th>95% CI a</th><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>53</td><td>0.96</td><td>0.51-1.82</td><td></td><td>10</td><td>0.82</td><td>0.35-1.90</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>16</td><td>0.60</td><td>0.24-1.50</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>1.09</td><td>0.39-3.05</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>10</td><td>3.21</td><td>1.34-7.71</td><td></td><td>3</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.06</td><td>1.00-1.12</td><td>0.06</td><td></td><td>1.03</td><td>0.96-1.11</td><td>0.35</td></tr><tr><td>Leukemia p</td><td>94</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>26</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>23</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>13</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>52</td><td>1.21</td><td>0.64-2.30</td><td></td><td>10</td><td>0.93</td><td>0.39-2.20</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>17</td><td>1.38</td><td>0.64-2.97</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>2</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.00</td><td>0.94-1.07</td><td>0.99</td><td></td><td>0.93</td><td>0.84-1.02</td><td>0.13</td></tr><tr><td>Non-Hodgkin lymphoma q</td><td>131</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>63</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>31</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>27</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>73</td><td>1.24</td><td>0.69-2.21</td><td></td><td>25</td><td>1.07</td><td>0.62-1.86</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>25</td><td>1.27</td><td>0.63-2.60</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>0.64</td><td>0.26-1.55</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>2</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>3</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.02</td><td>0.96-1.08</td><td>0.61</td><td></td><td>0.98</td><td>0.93-1.04</td><td>0.52</td></tr><tr><td>Multiple myeloma r</td><td>47</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>21</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>10</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>24</td><td>1.18</td><td>0.48-2.89</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>1.17</td><td>0.43-3.12</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>9</td><td>1.35</td><td>0.45-4.06</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>4</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.02</td><td>0.93-1.12</td><td>0.64</td><td></td><td>0.98</td><td>0.89-1.08</td><td>0.71</td></tr><tr><td>Melanoma s</td><td>125</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>79</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>34</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>38</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>60</td><td>0.65</td><td>0.39-1.09</td><td></td><td>21</td><td>0.84</td><td>0.49-1.44</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>28</td><td>0.97</td><td>0.53-1.76</td><td></td><td>13</td><td>1.23</td><td>0.65-2.31</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>3</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>7</td><td>1.89</td><td>0.84-4.26</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.01</td><td>0.95-1.06</td><td>0.86</td><td></td><td>1.03</td><td>0.99-1.08</td><td>0.14</td></tr><tr><td>Breast (Female) t</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>622</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>0.92</td><td>0.80-1.04</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>274</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>205</td><td>0.99</td><td>0.81-1.21</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>106</td><td>1.22</td><td>0.95-1.56</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>31</td><td>0.79</td><td>0.50-1.25</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1.00</td><td>0.99-1.02</td><td>0.71</td></tr><tr><td>Breast u</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>464</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(Postmenopausal female)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>5</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>186</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>156</td><td>1.22</td><td>0.93-1.60</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>93</td><td>1.62</td><td>1.17-2.24</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>24</td><td>1.07</td><td>0.61-1.87</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1.03</td><td>1.01-1.05</td><td>0.02</td></tr></tbody></table><!-- image -->

Table 2 continued

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 2 continued</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Cancer</th><th colspan="3">Men</th><th colspan="3">Women</th></tr><tr><th>BMI (kg/m 2 )</th><th>n</th><th>HR a</th><th>95% CI a</th><th>n</th><th>HR a</th><th>95% CI a</th></tr><tr><td>Ovarian</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>48</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>\ 18.5</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>18.5-24.9</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>19</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>21</td><td>1.44</td><td>0.78-2.67</td></tr><tr><td>30-34.9</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>5</td><td>0.48</td><td>0.14-1.63</td></tr><tr><td>C 35</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>2</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.98</td><td>0.92-1.05</td></tr></tbody></table>significant for all women, for ever smokers, or for those diagnosed 5 years after enrollment.

For the interaction between pesticide use and BMI on colon cancer risk in men, we evaluated 22 pesticides that were used by at least 10% of the male study population and for which there were at least five cancer cases in each BMI group, as well as any organochlorine or organophosphate insecticide (Table 3). Of the 22 pesticides examined, carbofuran and metolachlor had statistically significant ( p B 0.05) modifying effects. Specifically, BMI was positively associated with colon cancer among male users of carbofuran (HR = 1.10, 95% CI 1.04-1.17, p -trend = 0.002), but not among non-users of carbofuran (HR = 1.02, 95% CI 0.97-1.06, p -trend = 0.52) ( p -interaction = 0.04). BMI was positively associated with colon cancer among male users of metolachlor (HR = 1.09, 95% CI 1.04-1.15, p -trend = 0.001), but not among non-users of metolachlor (HR = 1.01, 95% CI 0.96-1.06, p -trend = 0.70) ( p -interaction = 0.02). There was a borderline statistically significant modifying effect of alachlor ( p -interaction = 0.07), with BMI positively associated with colon cancer among male users of alachlor (HR = 1.08, 95% CI 1.02-1.13, p -trend = 0.002), but not among non-users of alachlor (HR = 1.01, 95% CI 0.95-1.06, p -trend = 0.87). Since applicators often use more than one pesticide, we examined possible confounding by use of multiple pesticides. First, we examined the correlation between never/ever use of carbofuran, metolachlor, and alachlor among male participants and found that they were not highly correlated (r: metolachlor and alachlor = 0.31; metolachlor and carbofuran = 0.18, alachlor and carbofuran = 0.26). When

<!-- image -->

we further adjusted for use of multiple pesticides (i.e., carbofuran, metolachlor, or alachlor), the associations we reported did not measurably change. We also examined the associations between these pesticides and colon cancer risk stratifying by BMI and found that ever use compared to never use of carbofuran, metolachlor, and alachlor was associated with increased risks of colon cancer in obese men (not statistically significant), but not in normal or overweight men (Supplemental Table 1).

We did not find statistically significant modifying effects of the other pesticides examined with BMI on colon cancer risk among men. However, we did observe significant positive associations between BMI and colon cancer among men who used DDT, fonofos, malathion, carbaryl, permethrin, atrazine, cyanazine, trifluralin, EPTC, imazethapyr, glyphosate, and as a class, organochlorines or organophosphates, while the associations among non-users of these pesticides were not statistically significant. We observed significant positive associations between BMI and colon cancer among men who did not use terbufos, chlorpyrifos, metribuzin, pendimethalin, chlorimuron-ethyl, and methyl bromide, while the associations among users of these pesticides were not statistically significant (Table 3).

We examined the interactions between pesticide use and BMI on the risks of lung, bladder, prostate, and rectal cancers, and NHL and melanoma in men, as well as breast and colon cancers in women. Among male ever smokers, we found that the inverse association between BMI and lung cancer was statistically significant among non-users of carbofuran (HR = 0.87, 95% CI = 0.82-0.92, p -trend \ 0.0001), but not among users of carbofuran (HR = 1.01,

Table 3 Hazard rate ratio (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for colon cancer in relation to BMI at enrollment by ever/never use of pesticides among men

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 3 Hazard rate ratio (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for colon cancer in relation to BMI at enrollment by ever/never use of pesticides among men</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>BMI (kg/m 2 )</th><th>n</th><th>HR a</th><th>95% CI a</th><td></td><th>n</th><th>HR a</th><th>95% CI a</th><td></td><th>p -interaction b</th></tr><tr><th>Insecticide</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Organochlorines</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><th>No Organochlorine</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><th>Organochlorine c</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>9</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>11</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>41</th><td>2.20</td><td>0.97-4.99</td><td></td><td>37</td><td>1.33</td><td>0.67-2.63</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>20</th><td>2.39</td><td>0.98-5.85</td><td></td><td>26</td><td>2.11</td><td>1.02-4.38</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.05</td><td>0.99-1.12</td><td>0.14</td><td></td><td>1.07</td><td>1.01-1.13</td><td>0.02</td><td>0.52</td></tr><tr><td></td><th colspan="2">No DDT</th><td></td><td></td><th>DDT e</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>11</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>52</th><td>2.09</td><td>1.02-4.31</td><td></td><td>24</td><td>1.12</td><td>0.52-2.44</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>26</th><td>2.29</td><td>1.04-5.06</td><td></td><td>18</td><td>2.01</td><td>0.89-4.56</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.05</td><td>0.99-1.10</td><td>0.11</td><td></td><td>1.08</td><td>1.01-1.15</td><td>0.02</td><td>0.50</td></tr><tr><th>Organophosphates</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><th>No</th><th>Organophosphate</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><th>Organophosphate</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>17</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>28</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>33</th><td>1.24</td><td>0.61-2.52</td><td></td><td>79</td><td>1.29</td><td>0.81-2.06</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>20</th><td>1.78</td><td>0.82-3.87</td><td></td><td>53</td><td>2.02</td><td>1.23-3.32</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.03</td><td>0.97-1.10</td><td>0.37</td><td></td><td>1.06</td><td>1.02-1.10</td><td>0.004</td><td>0.47</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>No Terbufos</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><th>Terbufos</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>29</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>7</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>61</th><td>1.20</td><td>0.74-1.96</td><td></td><td>33</td><td>1.77</td><td>0.78-4.02</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>40</th><td>1.85</td><td>1.09-3.14</td><td></td><td>21</td><td>2.32</td><td>0.97-5.55</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.05</td><td>1.00-1.09</td><td>0.04</td><td></td><td>1.05</td><td>0.99-1.12</td><td>0.13</td><td>0.94</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>No Fonofos</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><th>Fonofos</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>31</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>69</th><td>1.22</td><td>0.76-1.94</td><td></td><td>26</td><td>1.23</td><td>0.54-2.78</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>42</th><td>1.60</td><td>0.96-2.67</td><td></td><td>21</td><td>2.36</td><td>1.02-5.46</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.04</td><td>0.99-1.08</td><td>0.10</td><td></td><td>1.07</td><td>1.00-1.14</td><td>0.06</td><td>0.59</td></tr><tr><td></td><th colspan="2">No Chlorpyrifos</th><td></td><td></td><th>Chlorpyrifos</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>27</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>17</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>74</th><td>1.64</td><td>0.98-2.73</td><td></td><td>32</td><td>0.86</td><td>0.46-1.63</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>40</th><td>1.97</td><td>1.12-3.46</td><td></td><td>30</td><td>1.86</td><td>0.98-3.54</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.05</td><td>1.01-1.10</td><td>0.01</td><td></td><td>1.04</td><td>0.98-1.11</td><td>0.17</td><td>0.61</td></tr><tr><td></td><th colspan="2">No Malathion</th><td></td><td></td><th>Malathion</th><th>e</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>9</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>11</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>33</th><td>1.70</td><td>0.74-3.92</td><td></td><td>43</td><td>1.52</td><td>0.78-2.99</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>20</th><td>2.22</td><td>0.90-5.46</td><td></td><td>25</td><td>2.07</td><td>1.00-4.29</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.06</td><td>0.99-1.13</td><td>0.09</td><td></td><td>1.06</td><td>1.00-1.12</td><td>0.05</td><td>0.88</td></tr><tr><td></td><th colspan="2">No Dichlorvos</th><td></td><td></td><th>Dichlorvos</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>30</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>8</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>82</th><td>1.33</td><td>0.86-2.07</td><td></td><td>10</td><td>0.69</td><td>0.24-1.98</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>50</th><td>1.72</td><td>1.06-2.78</td><td></td><td>11</td><td>2.03</td><td>0.72-5.73</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.03</td><td>0.99-1.07</td><td>0.11</td><td></td><td>1.09</td><td>0.99-1.20</td><td>0.08</td><td>0.47</td></tr><tr><th>Carbamate</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><th colspan="2">No Carbofuran</th><td></td><td></td><th>Carbofuran</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>31</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>7</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>66</th><td>1.13</td><td>0.71-1.78</td><td></td><td>28</td><td>1.80</td><td>0.73-4.43</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>38</th><td>1.38</td><td>0.82-2.30</td><td></td><td>24</td><td>3.68</td><td>1.46-9.26</td><td></td><td></td></tr></tbody></table><!-- image -->

Table 3 continued

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 3 continued</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>BMI (kg/m 2 )</th><th>n</th><th>HR a</th><th>95% CI a</th><td></td><th>n</th><th>HR a</th><th>95% CI a</th><td></td><th>p -interaction b</th></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><th>1.02</th><th>0.97-1.06</th><th>0.52</th><td></td><th>1.10</th><th>1.04-1.17</th><th>0.002</th><th>0.04</th></tr><tr><td></td><th>No Carbaryl</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><th colspan="2">Carbaryl e</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>11</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>45</th><td>1.60</td><td>0.80-3.23</td><td></td><td>31</td><td>1.61</td><td>0.73-3.55</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>23</th><td>1.87</td><td>0.87-4.03</td><td></td><td>22</td><td>2.50</td><td>1.08-5.79</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.04</td><td>0.99-1.11</td><td>0.14</td><td></td><td>1.08</td><td>1.01-1.14</td><td>0.02</td><td>0.43</td></tr><tr><th>Pyrethroid</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><th>No Permethrin</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="3">Permethrin (crops or animal)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>33</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>7</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>78</th><td>1.22</td><td>0.79-1.89</td><td></td><td>21</td><td>1.34</td><td>0.53-3.37</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>47</th><td>1.63</td><td>1.01-2.64</td><td></td><td>19</td><td>2.70</td><td>1.05-6.96</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.04</td><td>0.99-1.08</td><td>0.09</td><td></td><td>1.08</td><td>1.01-1.15</td><td>0.02</td><td>0.21</td></tr><tr><th>Herbicide</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Triazine</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><th>No</th><td>Atrazine</td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="3">Atrazine</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>20</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>24</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>35</th><td>1.11</td><td>0.59-2.09</td><td></td><td>69</td><td>1.38</td><td>0.83-2.30</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>14</th><td>1.05</td><td>0.48-2.29</td><td></td><td>58</td><td>2.61</td><td>1.55-4.40</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.02</td><td>0.95-1.08</td><td>0.64</td><td></td><td>1.07</td><td>1.03-1.12</td><td>0.001</td><td>0.33</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>No</th><th>Cyanazine</th><td></td><td></td><th>Cyanazine</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>27</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>14</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>58</th><td>1.06</td><td>0.65-1.73</td><td></td><td>37</td><td>1.34</td><td>0.68-2.65</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>33</th><td>1.34</td><td>0.78- 2.32</td><td></td><td>31</td><td>2.54</td><td>1.26-5.11</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.03</td><td>0.99-1.08</td><td>0.16</td><td></td><td>1.05</td><td>1.00-1.11</td><td>0.06</td><td>0.70</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>No</th><th>Metribuzin</th><td></td><td></td><th>Metribuzin e</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>13</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>55</th><td>2.00</td><td>1.03-3.86</td><td></td><td>23</td><td>1.34</td><td>0.54-3.33</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>32</th><td>2.70</td><td>1.33- 5.47</td><td></td><td>12</td><td>1.41</td><td>0.50-3.96</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.08</td><td>1.03-1.13</td><td>0.002</td><td></td><td>1.00</td><td>0.91-1.09</td><td>0.95</td><td>0.12</td></tr><tr><th>Chloroacetanilide</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><th colspan="2">No Metolachlor</th><td></td><td></td><th>Metolachor</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>28</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>12</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>57</th><td>1.09</td><td>0.67-1.77</td><td></td><td>36</td><td>1.39</td><td>0.68-2.83</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>31</th><td>1.29</td><td>0.74-2.25</td><td></td><td>35</td><td>2.91</td><td>1.42-5.96</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.01</td><td>0.96-1.06</td><td>0.70</td><td></td><td>1.09</td><td>1.04-1.15</td><td>0.001</td><td>0.02</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>No Alachlor</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><th>Alachlor</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>24</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>14</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>40</th><td>0.87</td><td>0.51-1.48</td><td></td><td>53</td><td>1.92</td><td>1.00-3.68</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>25</th><td>1.14</td><td>0.62-2.11</td><td></td><td>41</td><td>3.12</td><td>1.59-6.12</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.01</td><td>0.95-1.06</td><td>0.87</td><td></td><td>1.08</td><td>1.03-1.13</td><td>0.002</td><td>0.07</td></tr><tr><th>Dinotroaniline</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>No Pendimethalin 12</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>Pendimethalin 7</td><td>e 1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>25-29.9</th><th>57</th><td>2.28</td><td>1.15-4.51</td><td></td><td>20</td><td>0.97</td><td>0.40-2.36</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>C 30</th><th>29</th><td>2.88</td><td>1.38-6.00</td><td></td><td>15</td><td>1.32</td><td>0.50-3.49</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Trend a</th><td></td><td>1.06</td><td>1.01-1.11</td><td>0.02</td><td></td><td>1.06</td><td>0.98-1.14</td><td>0.17</td><td>0.95</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>No</th><td>Trifluralin</td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="3">Trifluralin</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>\ 25</th><th>21</th><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td colspan="3">16</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr></tbody></table><!-- image -->

Table 3 continued

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 3 continued</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>BMI (kg/m 2 )</th><th>n</th><th>HR a</th><th>95% CI a</th><td></td><th>n</th><th>HR a</th><th>95% CI a</th><td></td><th>p -interaction b</th></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>46</td><td>1.34</td><td>0.75-2.39</td><td></td><td>49</td><td>1.37</td><td>0.75-2.50</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 30</td><td>23</td><td>1.36</td><td>0.70-2.66</td><td></td><td>43</td><td>2.59</td><td>1.40-4.80</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.03</td><td>0.98-1.09</td><td>0.30</td><td></td><td>1.07</td><td>1.02-1.12</td><td>0.01</td><td>0.38</td></tr><tr><th>Thiocarbamate</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">No EPTC</td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="2">EPTC</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 25</td><td>32</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>73</td><td>1.21</td><td>0.77-1.89</td><td></td><td>19</td><td>1.25</td><td>0.49-3.22</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 30</td><td>47</td><td>1.64</td><td>1.00-2.68</td><td></td><td>16</td><td>2.67</td><td>1.01-7.08</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.03</td><td>0.99-1.08</td><td>0.14</td><td></td><td>1.09</td><td>1.01-1.17</td><td>0.02</td><td>0.38</td></tr><tr><th>Imidazolinone</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">No Imazethapyr</td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="2">Imazethapyr</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 25</td><td>28</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>11</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>56</td><td>1.15</td><td>0.71-1.87</td><td></td><td>37</td><td>1.40</td><td>0.67-2.93</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 30</td><td>38</td><td>1.66</td><td>0.97-2.84</td><td></td><td>28</td><td>2.25</td><td>1.05-4.81</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.04</td><td>0.99-1.09</td><td>0.09</td><td></td><td>1.06</td><td>1.00-1.12</td><td>0.07</td><td>0.59</td></tr><tr><th>Phosphinic</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">No Glyphosate</td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="2">Glyphosate</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 25</td><td>11</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>34</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>26</td><td>1.03</td><td>0.49-2.19</td><td></td><td>81</td><td>1.35</td><td>0.85-2.13</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 30</td><td>18</td><td>1.46</td><td>0.64-3.31</td><td></td><td>53</td><td>2.07</td><td>1.27- 3.37</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.00</td><td>0.92-1.07</td><td>0.92</td><td></td><td>1.07</td><td>1.03-1.11</td><td>0.001</td><td>0.13</td></tr><tr><th>Urea</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="3">No Chlorimuron-ethyl</td><td></td><td colspan="2">Chlorimuron-ethyl</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 25</td><td>14</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>5</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>54</td><td>1.74</td><td>0.92-3.29</td><td></td><td>24</td><td>1.74</td><td>0.66-4.65</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 30</td><td>26</td><td>1.88</td><td>0.92-3.83</td><td></td><td>18</td><td>2.79</td><td>1.01-7.75</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.06</td><td>1.01-1.12</td><td>0.03</td><td></td><td>1.05</td><td>0.98-1.13</td><td>0.18</td><td>0.89</td></tr><tr><th>Benzoic</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">No Dicamba</td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="2">Dicamba</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 25</td><td>22</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>17</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>45</td><td>1.26</td><td>0.72-2.19</td><td></td><td>49</td><td>1.14</td><td>0.63-2.06</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 30</td><td>35</td><td>1.92</td><td>1.05-3.50</td><td></td><td>30</td><td>1.73</td><td>0.92-3.24</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.04</td><td>0.99-1.09</td><td>0.11</td><td></td><td>1.05</td><td>0.99-1.10</td><td>0.09</td><td>0.92</td></tr><tr><th>Fumigant</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">No Methyl Bromide</td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="2">Methyl Bromide</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>\ 25</td><td>34</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>10</td><td>1.00</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25-29.9</td><td>88</td><td>1.38</td><td>0.89-2.15</td><td></td><td>17</td><td>0.80</td><td>0.33-1.91</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C 30</td><td>57</td><td>1.98</td><td>1.23-3.20</td><td></td><td>14</td><td>1.72</td><td>0.70-4.21</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trend a</td><td></td><td>1.05</td><td>1.01-1.09</td><td>0.02</td><td></td><td>1.06</td><td>0.98-1.14</td><td>0.14</td><td>0.85</td></tr></tbody></table><!-- image -->

95% CI = 0.93-1.09; p -trend = 0.77) ( p -interaction = 0.02). Among postmenopausal women, the positive association between BMI and breast cancer was statistically significant in women who did not use malathion, diazinon, or any organochlorine or organophosphate insecticide, while the associations among users of these pesticides were not statistically significant. The tests of interaction between BMI and pesticide use on postmenopausal breast cancer were not statistically significant (Supplemental Table 2). We did not find any other statistically significant modifying effects on any of the other associations examined.

## Discussion

In our AHS population of US farmers and their spouses and commercial pesticide applicators, 64% were overweight or obese, which is comparable to the frequency reported in the non-Hispanic white US population; however, in our population the frequency of overweight was higher (43%) and the frequency of obesity was lower (21%) than the US population, where 33% are overweight and 31% are obese [26]. The frequency of overweight and obesity in our population was similar to that reported in an Austrian farming population where 43% were overweight and 15% obese [27]. The mean BMI in our study population (27.6 kg/m 2 ) is very close to the mean BMI reported in New York dairy farmers (26.9 kg/m 2 ) [28].

Consistent with previous studies, we found a significant positive association between BMI and colon cancer among men [3, 29-31]. This association was not significantly modified by diet (meat, fruit, vegetable consumption) or leisure-time exercise, which is in agreement with a previous study of male health professionals that showed an association between BMI and colon cancer independent of physical activity [32]. We found no association between BMI and colon cancer among women, which has been previously observed and attributed to waist size being a stronger predictor of colon cancer than BMI in women [29, 30].

We found that the positive association between BMI and colon cancer in men was significant among users of carbofuran, metolachlor, and alachlor, but not among nonusers of these pesticides. These findings suggest that these pesticides may modify the carcinogenic effect of obesity, although the current understanding of the mechanisms in humans is limited. Obesity has been suggested to contribute to colon cancer via increased leptin that is linked to growth of colonic epithelial cells [33] and increased insulin-like growth factor (IGF) that promotes tumor growth [34]. Carbofuran is a carbamate insecticide that inhibits cholinesterase and has been shown to generate reactive oxygen species and induce lipid peroxidation [35], and

<!-- image -->

metolachlor and alachlor are chloroacetanilide herbicides that have a chlorinated amide chemical structure [36]. None of these three pesticides are considered lipophilic on the basis of the n -octanol/water partition coefficient ( K ow: carbofuran = 1.3, metolachlor = 3.5, alachlor = 2.9) [36], suggesting that lipophilicity is not a necessary factor for the modification of the BMI and colon cancer associations. Based on US EPA guidelines, carbofuran is a ' 'not likely' carcinogen [37], metolachlor is a ''possible'' carcinogen [38], and alachlor is a ''likely'' human carcinogen at high doses, but a ''not likely' carcinogen at low doses [39]. In addition, none of these pesticides have been linked to colon cancer in the AHS [40-42] or reported in other populations. The effect of these pesticides on obesity has not been reported. We found that users of carbofuran, metolachlor, alachlor had slightly higher and statistically significant mean BMIs than non-users, adjusting for age, sex, and education, providing some evidence that the metabolism of these pesticides may be linked to obesityrelated factors.

We observed that men who used 11 other pesticides [insecticides: carbaryl (carbamate), fonofos and malathion (organophosphates), DDT (organochlorine), permethrin (pyrethroid)]; herbicides: atrazine and cyanazine (triazine), trifluralin (dinitroanaline), EPTC (thiocarbamate), imazethapyr (imidazolinone), glyphosate (phosphinic)] had positive associations between BMI and colon cancer, but non-users did not. Of these, atrazine, cyanazine, trifluralin, and imazethapyr have an aromatic amine chemical structure [35]. Previous studies in the AHS reported that use of two aromatic amine pesticides, imazethapyr [43], and trifluralin [44], was linked to increased colon cancer risk. Aromatic amine compounds, mostly those formed from meats cooked at high temperatures, have been linked to colon cancer [45, 46]. It is important to note that we also observed that non-users of six pesticides [insecticide: terbufos and chlorpyrifos (organophosphate); herbicides: metribuzin (triazinone), pendimethalin (dinitroaniline), chlorimuron-ethyl (urea); fumigant: methyl bromide] had significant associations between BMI and colon cancer, but users did not (interaction tests were not statistically significant). Of these, pendimethalin and chlorimuron-ethyl are aromatic amine compounds [35]. The occurrence of significant associations among users and non-users of pesticides in the same chemical group may indicate that these are chance findings. In addition, our finding of positive associations between BMI and colon cancer among men who used any organophosphate (non-lipophilic class), and the null association among men who did not use these pesticides (interaction tests were not statistically significant), further supports our earlier statement that the associations between BMI and colon cancer were not modified by the lipophilic status of pesticides.

Our finding of an inverse association between BMI and lung cancer in men, particularly in ever smokers, is consistent with previous studies [47]. For example, a metaanalysis of five prospective studies of BMI and lung cancer reported a statistically significant summary risk ratio of 0.76 (95% CI 0.67-0.85) among smokers, but not among non-smokers (RR = 0.91, 95% CI 0.76-1.10) [47]. This could be due to uncontrolled confounding from smoking because smokers have lower BMIs and a higher risk for lung cancer [48]. In the AHS, underweight subjects were more likely to be current smokers, while overweight/obese subjects were more likely to be former smokers compared to normal weight subjects. Current smoking was associated with a significant four-fold risk of lung cancer among men in our study population. Leanness due to preclinical disease did not appear to be a confounding factor in our study or other previous studies [49-51]. Biological mechanisms explaining the relationship between leanness and lung cancer risk among smokers are not well understood, but it has been suggested that leanness may serve as a marker of vulnerability to the effects of smoking either through acquired or inherited factors [52, 53].

Among male ever smokers, there was a statistically significant inverse association between BMI and lung cancer in non-users of carbofuran, but a null association in those that used carbofuran. A previous study in the AHS found elevated risks of lung cancer with reported use of carbofuran [54, 55]. This finding together with our observation suggests the possibility that carbofuran use may interact with obesity to increase the risk of lung cancer.

The positive association between BMI and breast cancer among postmenopausal women is in agreement with previous studies [56, 57]. The main source of estrogen in postmenopausal women is from androstenedione in adipocytes; therefore, heavier postmenopausal women tend to produce more estrogen, which is linked to higher cell proliferation and DNA damage [58]. In premenopausal women, regular anovulatory cycle reduces exposure to estrogen and decreases their breast cancer risk [56, 58]. It is unclear why the positive association between BMI and breast cancer was apparent in those who did not drink, since alcohol consumption is considered a risk factor for postmenopausal breast cancer due to the decrease in the clearance of estradiol [59, 60]. In our population, ever alcohol drinking was associated with an excess risk of postmenopausal breast cancer in women with a BMI \ 25 kg/m 2 (HR = 1.25, 95% CI = 0.85-1.86), but not in women with a BMI C 25 kg/m 2 (HR = 0.87, 95% CI = 0.63-1.19). The interaction between BMI and alcohol consumption was found in a case-control study that reported that one drink per day was associated with estrogen receptor positive tumors in women with a BMI \ 25 kg/m 2 , but not in women with a BMI C 25 kg/m 2 [61].

A few other studies have suggested that alcohol intake and BMI may only be risk factors for certain histologic types of breast cancer [62, 63], which we were not able to evaluate in our study.

The positive associations between BMI and postmenopausal breast cancer were present among women who did not use malathion, diazinon, or any organophosphate or organochlorine insecticide, but not in women who used these pesticides. Since this modifying effect was not specific to a particular pesticide, this finding appears to suggest some uncontrolled difference between women who applied and did not apply pesticides. Consistent with our results, a previous study of breast cancer in the AHS found that women who never applied pesticides, including organophosphates or organochlorines, had higher risks of breast cancer than women who applied pesticides [64]. Reasons for this finding are unclear but may suggest a possible protective effect of working on the farm (i.e., physical activity, vitamin D exposure), although further study is needed.

This study has several important strengths. Due to the prospective study design, pesticide use and other selfreported data recorded at enrollment was obtained prior to cancer diagnosis, thus any recall bias should be non-differential and unlikely to create false-positive associations. Self-reported pesticide use among farmers in the AHS has been shown to be reasonably reliable [65, 66]. Detailed demographic, lifestyle, and medical history data allowed us to adjust for several important risk factors. Misclassification of cancer diagnoses is unlikely given the linkage to population-based state cancer registries.

There are limitations to this study. Although BMI is a well-defined indicator of obesity, it has been shown to overestimate obesity in athletes [67]. This potentially could have occurred in our population given the physical activity of farmers, and the higher prevalence of overweight in our study population and other farming populations compared to the general US population. Some participants did not provide height and weight at enrollment. Two data sources were used to estimate missing height and weight at enrollment, i.e., 5-year follow-up phone interview and driver's license data. To evaluate the possible impact of pre-existing cancer, we excluded lung cancer cases diagnosed within the first 5 years after enrollment and found the associations were not altered. Because we examined the interactions of several pesticides, it is possible that some of our results could have occurred by chance alone. It is not clear if pesticide use resulted in obesity since we could not evaluate change in weight over time. Furthermore, since the mechanisms by which pesticides may interact with BMI on cancer risk in humans are unclear, our findings should be considered hypothesis generating for future studies.

<!-- image -->

In conclusion, in this US population of farmers, pesticide applicators and their spouses, we found that BMI is positively associated with colon cancer in men and with breast cancer in postmenopausal women, as well as inversely associated with lung cancer among men who ever smoked. This is the first large prospective cohort study with the capacity to examine possible modifying effects of several pesticides on the association between BMI and several cancer sites. The positive association between BMI and colon cancer in men who ever used carbofuran or metolachlor raised the possibility that certain pesticides may modify the effects of BMI on the risks of some cancers. The potential for this interaction should be evaluated in other populations.

Acknowledgments This paper has been supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, National Cancer Institute (Z01 CP010119), and National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (Z01-ES049030-11). We thank the Agricultural Health Study participants for their participation, and the field station and coordinating center staff for their efforts.

## References

1. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, McDowell MA, Flegal KM (2007) Obesity among adults in the United States-no change since 2003-2004. NCHS data brief no 1. National Center for Health Statistics, Hyattsville
2. Calle EE, Kaaks R (2004) Overweight, obesity and cancer: epidemiological evidence and proposed mechanisms. Nat Rev Cancer 4:579-591
3. Samanic C, Gridley G, Chow WH, Lubin J, Hoover RN, Fraumeni JF Jr (2004) Obesity and cancer risk among white and black United States veterans. Cancer Causes Control 15(1):35-43
4. Hjarta ˚ker A, Langseth H, Weiderpass E (2008) Obesity and diabetes epidemics: cancer repercussions. Adv Exp Med Biol 630:72-93
5. Bianchini F, Kaaks R, Vainio H (2002) Overweight, obesity, and cancer risk. Lancet Oncol 3:565-574
6. Blair A, Zahm SH, Pearce NE, Heineman EF, Fraumeni JF Jr (1992) Clues to cancer etiology from studies of farmers. Scand J Work Environ Health 18:209-215
7. Keller-Byrne JE, Khuder SA, Schaub EA (1997) Meta-analyses of prostate cancer and farming. Am J Ind Med 31:580-586
8. Khuder SA, Mutgi AB (1997) Meta-analyses of multiple myeloma and farming. Am J Ind Med 32:510-516
9. Khuder SA, Mutgi AB, Schaub EA, Tano BD (1999) Metaanalysis of Hodgkin's disease among farmers. Scand J Work Environ Health 25:436-441
10. Alavanja MC, Ward MH, Reynolds P (2007) Carcinogenicity of agricultural pesticides in adults and children. J Agromedicine 12:39-56
11. Alavanja MC, Hoppin JA, Kamel F (2004) Health effects of chronic pesticide exposure: cancer and neurotoxicity. Annu Rev Public Health 25:155-197
12. Alavanja MC, Bonner MR (2005) Pesticides and human cancers. Cancer Invest 23:700-711
13. International Agency for Research on Cancer. Occupational exposures in insecticide application, and some pesticides. Lyon:
14. IARC, 1991. IARC Monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risk to humans, vol. 53
14. Kelce WR, Stone CR, Laws SC, Gray LE, Kemppainen JA, Wilson EM (1995) Persistent DDT metabolite p, p 0 -DDE is a potent androgen receptor antagonist. Nature 375:581-585
15. Soto AM, Sonnenschein C, Chung KL, Fernandez MF, Olea N, Serrano FO (1995) The E-SCREEN assay as a tool to identify estrogens: an update on estrogenic environmental pollutants. Environ Health Perspect 103:113-122
16. Schildkraut JM, Demark-Wahnefried W, DeVoto E, Hughes C, Laseter JL, Newman B (1999) Environmental contaminants and body fat distribution. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 8:179183
17. Pelletier C, Despre ´s JP, Tremblay A (2002) Plasma organochlorine concentrations in endurance athletes and obese individuals. Med Sci Sports Exerc 34:1971-1975
18. Diamanti-Kandarakis E, Bourguignon JP, Giudice LC, Hauser R, Prins GS, Soto AM, Zoeller RT, Gore AC (2009) Endocrinedisrupting chemicals: an endocrine society scientific statement. Endocr Rev 30:293-342
19. Slotkin TA, Seidler FJ (2009) Oxidative and excitatory mechanisms of developmental neurotoxicity: transcriptional profiles for chlorpyrifos, diazinon, dieldrin, and divalent nickel in PC12 cells. Environ Health Perspect 117:587-596
20. Baillie-Hamilton PF (2002) Chemical toxins: a hypothesis to explain the global obesity epidemic. J Altern Complement Med 8:185-192
21. Heindel JJ (2003) Endocrine disruptors and the obesity epidemic. Toxicol Sci 76:247-249
22. Irigaray P, Ogier V, Jacquenet S, Notet V, Sibille P, Me ´jean L, Bihain BE, Yen FT (2006) Benzo[a]pyrene impairs beta-adrenergic stimulation of adipose tissue lipolysis and causes weight gain in mice. A novel molecular mechanism of toxicity for a common food pollutant. FEBS J 273:1362-1372
23. Alavanja MC, Sandler DP, McMaster SB, Zahm SH, McDonnell CJ, Lynch CF, Pennybacker M, Rothman N, Dosemeci M, Bond AE, Blair A (1996) The Agricultural Health Study. Environ Health Perspect 104:362-369
24. Tarone RE, Alavanja MC, Zahm SH, Lubin JH, Sandler DP, McMaster SB, Rothman N, Blair A (1997) The Agricultural Health Study: factors affecting completion and return of selfadministered questionnaires in a large prospective cohort study of pesticide applicators. Am J Ind Med 31:233-242
25. World Health Organization (1998) Obesity. Preventing and managing the global epidemic. Report of a WHO consultation on obesity, Geneva, 3-5 June. World Health Organization, Geneva
26. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, McDowell MA, Tabak CJ, Flegal KM (2006) Prevalence of overweight and obesity in the United States, 1999-2004. JAMA 295:1549-1555
27. Dorner T, Leitner B, Stadlmann H, Fischer W, Neidhart B, Lawrence K, Kiefer I, Rathmanner T, Kunze M, Rieder A (2004) Prevalence of overweight and obesity in Austrian male and female farmers. Soz Praventivmed 49:243-246
28. Jenkins PL, Earle-Richardson G, Bell EM, May JJ, Green A (2005) Chronic disease risk in central New York dairy farmers: results from a large health survey 1989-1999. Am J Ind Med 47:20-26
29. Moore LL, Bradlee ML, Singer MR, Splansky GL, Proctor MH, Ellison RC, Kreger BE (2004) BMI and waist circumference as predictors of lifetime colon cancer risk in Framingham Study adults. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 28:559-567
30. Rapp K, Schroeder J, Klenk J, Stoehr S, Ulmer H, Concin H, Diem G, Oberaigner W, Weiland SK (2005) Obesity and incidence of cancer: a large cohort study of over 145, 000 adults in Austria. Br J Cancer 93:1062-1067

<!-- image -->

31. Samanic C, Chow WH, Gridley G, Jarvholm B, Fraumeni JF Jr (2006) Relation of body mass index to cancer risk in 362, 552 Swedish men. Cancer Causes Control 17:901-909
32. Giovannucci E, Ascherio A, Rimm EB, Colditz GA, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC (1995) Physical activity, obesity, and risk for colon cancer and adenoma in men. Ann Intern Med 122:327-334
33. Hardwick JC, Van Den Brink GR, Offerhaus GJ, Van Deventer SJ, Peppelenbosch MP (2001) Leptin is a growth factor for colonic epithelial cells. Gastroenterology 121:79-90
34. Calle EE, Thun MJ (2004) Obesity and cancer. Oncogene 23:365-378
35. Kamboj A, Kiran R, Sandhir R (2006) N-acetylcysteine ameliorates carbofuran-induced alterations in lipid composition and activity of membrane bound enzymes. Mol Cell Biochem 286:107-114
36. Kid H, James DR (eds) (1991) The agrochemicals handbook. Unwin Brothers Limited, United Kingdom
37. http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/reregistration/REDs/factsheets/car bofuran\_ired\_fs.htm
38. http://www.epa.gov/oppsrrd1/REDs/factsheets/0063fact.pdf
39. http://www.epa.gov/oppsrrd1/reregistration/REDs/factsheets/000 1fact.pdf
40. Lee WJ, Sandler DP, Blair A, Samanic C, Cross AJ, Alavanja MC (2007) Pesticide use and colorectal cancer risk in the Agricultural Health Study. Int J Cancer 121:339-346
41. Bonner MR, Lee WJ, Sandler DP, Hoppin JA, Dosemeci M, Alavanja MC (2005) Occupational exposure to carbofuran and the incidence of cancer in the Agricultural Health Study. Environ Health Perspect 113:285-289
42. Rusiecki JA, Hou L, Lee WJ, Blair A, Dosemeci M, Lubin JH, Bonner M, Samanic C, Hoppin JA, Sandler DP, Alavanja MC (2006) Cancer incidence among pesticide applicators exposed to metolachlor in the Agricultural Health Study. Int J Cancer 118:3118-3123
43. Koutros S, Lynch CF, Ma X, Lee WJ, Hoppin JA, Christensen CH, Andreotti G, Freeman LB, Rusiecki JA, Hou L, Sandler DP, Alavanja MC (2009) Heterocyclic aromatic amine pesticide use and human cancer risk: results from the US Agricultural Health Study. Int J Cancer 124:1206-1212
44. Kang D, Park SK, Beane-Freeman L, Lynch CF, Knott CE, Sandler DP, Hoppin JA, Dosemeci M, Coble J, Lubin J, Blair A, Alavanja M (2008) Cancer incidence among pesticide applicators exposed to trifluralin in the Agricultural Health Study. Environ Res 107:271-276
45. Nowell S, Coles B, Sinha R, MacLeod S, Luke Ratnasinghe D, Stotts C, Kadlubar FF, Ambrosone CB, Lang NP (2002) Analysis of total meat intake and exposure to individual heterocyclic amines in a case-control study of colorectal cancer: contribution of metabolic variation to risk. Mutat Res 506-507:175-185
46. Butler LM, Sinha R, Millikan RC, Martin CF, Newman B, Gammon MD, Ammerman AS, Sandler RS (2003) Heterocyclic amines, meat intake, and association with colon cancer in a population-based study. Am J Epidemiol 157:434-445
47. Renehan AG, Tyson M, Egger M, Heller RF, Zwahlen M (2008) Body-mass index and incidence of cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective observational studies. Lancet 371:569-578
48. Canoy D, Wareham N, Luben R, Welch A, Bingham S, Day N, Khaw KT (2005) Cigarette smoking and fat distribution in 21, 828 British men and women: a population-based study. Obes Res 13:1466-1475
49. Kark JD, Yaari S, Rasooly I, Goldbourt U (1995) Are lean smokers at increased risk of lung cancer? The Israel Civil Servant Cancer Study. Arch Intern Med 155:2409-2416
50. Olson JE, Yang P, Schmitz K, Vierkant RA, Cerhan JR, Sellers TA (2002) Differential association of body mass index and fat
21. distribution with three major histologic types of lung cancer: evidence from a cohort of older women. Am J Epidemiol 156:606-615
51. Kanashiki M, Sairenchi T, Saito Y, Ishikawa H, Satoh H, Sekizawa K (2005) Body mass index and lung cancer: a case-control study of subjects participating in a mass-screening program. Chest 128:1490-1496
52. Sidney S, Friedman GD, Siegelaub AB (1987) Thinness and mortality. Am J Public Health 77:317-322
53. Shields PG, Harris CC (1991) Molecular epidemiology and the genetics of environmental cancer. JAMA 266:681-687
54. Alavanja MC, Dosemeci M, Samanic C, Lubin J, Lynch CF, Knott C, Barker J, Hoppin JA, Sandler DP, Coble J, Thomas K, Blair A (2004) Pesticides and lung cancer risk in the agricultural health study cohort. Am J Epidemiol 160:876-885
55. Bonner MR, Lee WJ, Sandler DP, Hoppin JA, Dosemeci M, Alavanja MC (2005) Occupational exposure to carbofuran and the incidence of cancer in the Agricultural Health Study. Environ Health Perspect 113:285-289
56. Carmichael AR, Bates T (2004) Obesity and breast cancer: a review of the literature. Breast 13:85-92
57. Kuriyama S, Tsubono Y, Hozawa A, Shimazu T, Suzuki Y, Koizumi Y, Suzuki Y, Ohmori K, Nishino Y, Tsuji I (2005) Obesity and risk of cancer in Japan. Int J Cancer 113:148-157
58. Potischman N, Swanson CA, Siiteri P, Hoover RN (1996) Reversal of relation between body mass and endogenous estrogen concentrations with menopausal status. J Natl Cancer Inst 88:756-758
59. Duffy CM, Assaf A, Cyr M, Burkholder G, Coccio E, Rohan T, McTiernan A, Paskett E, Lane D, Chetty VK (2008) Alcohol and folate intake and breast cancer risk in the WHI observational study. Breast Cancer Res Treat
60. Wayne S, Neuhouser ML, Ulrich CM, Koprowski C, Wiggins C, Baumgartner KB, Bernstein L, Baumgartner RN, Gilliland F, McTiernan A, Ballard-Barbash R (2008) Association between alcohol intake and serum sex hormones and peptides differs by tamoxifen use in breast cancer survivors. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 17:3224-3232
61. Terry MB, Zhang FF, Kabat G, Britton JA, Teitelbaum SL, Neugut AI, Gammon MD (2006) Lifetime alcohol intake and breast cancer risk. Ann Epidemiol 16:230-240
62. Li CI, Daling JR, Malone KE, Bernstein L, Marchbanks PA, Liff JM, Strom BL, Simon MS, Press MF, McDonald JA, Ursin G, Burkman RT, Deapen D, Spirtas R (2006) Relationship between established breast cancer risk factors and risk of seven different histologic types of invasive breast cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 15:946-954
63. Suzuki R, Orsini N, Mignone L, Saji S, Wolk A (2008) Alcohol intake and risk of breast cancer defined by estrogen and progesterone receptor status-a meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. Int J Cancer 122:1832-1841
64. Engel LS, Hill DA, Hoppin JA, Lubin JH, Lynch CF, Pierce J, Samanic C, Sandler DP, Blair A, Alavanja MC (2005) Pesticide use and breast cancer risk among farmers' wives in the agricultural health study. Am J Epidemiol 161:121-123
65. Blair A, Tarone R, Sandler D, Lynch CF, Rowland A, Wintersteen W, Steen WC, Samanic C, Dosemeci M, Alavanja MC (2002) Reliability of reporting on life-style and agricultural factors by a sample of participants in the Agricultural Health Study from Iowa. Epidemiology 13:94-99
66. Hoppin JA, Yucel F, Dosemeci M, Sandler DP (2002) Accuracy of self-reported pesticide use duration information from licensed pesticide applicators in the Agricultural Health Study. J Expo Anal Environ Epidemiol 12:313-318
67. Ode JJ, Pivarnik JM, Reeves MJ, Knous JL (2007) Body mass index as a predictor of percent fat in college athletes and nonathletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc 39:403-409

<!-- image -->