- Additional supplemental material is published online only. To view, please visit the journal online (https://  doi. org/  10.  1136/  oemed-  2025110386).

1 Occupational and Environmental Epidemiology Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA 2 Heart Disease Phenomics Laboratory, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA 3 Epidemiology Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA

4 Department of Laboratory Medicine &amp; Pathology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA 5 Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

## Correspondence to

Dr Gabriella Andreotti; andreotg@  mail.  nih.  gov and Dr Jonathan N Hofmann; hofmannjn@  mail.  nih.  gov

Received 6 June 2025 Accepted 22 October 2025 Published Online First 11 November 2025

<!-- image -->

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2025. No commercial re-  use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

To cite: Andreotti G, Shearer JJ, Sandler DP , et al . Occup Environ Med 2025; 82 :469-475.

<!-- image -->

Original research

## Atrazine use and markers of kidney function and nephrotoxicity among male farmers in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture Study

Gabriella Andreotti , 1 Joseph J Shearer, 2 Dale P Sandler , 3 Anna M Lukkari, 4 Richard V Remigio, 1 Christine G Parks, 3 Vicky C Chang , 1 Venkata Sabbisetti, 5 Laura E Beane Freeman , 1 Amy B Karger, 4 Jonathan N Hofmann 1

## ABSTRACT

Objective Atrazine, an herbicide widely used in US agriculture, has been associated with kidney cancer and non-  malignant kidney disease. However, the potential mechanisms underlying these associations remain unclear. We evaluated atrazine use and biomarkers of kidney function and nephrotoxicity among male farmers in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture Study.

Methods Our investigation included three groups of farmers defined based on atrazine use: (1) both recent (last 3  months) and past use (continuous users; n=83); (2) high lifetime use (≥178.5 lifetime days) but no recent use (former high users; n=88) and (3) never/ low lifetime use (&lt;50 lifetime days) and no recent use (never/low users; n=75). Biomarkers were measured in serum (creatinine, cystatin C, urea nitrogen, uric acid) and urine (kidney injury molecule-  1 (KIM-  1), albumin, creatinine). The 2021 CKD-  EPI creatinine-  cystatin C equation was used to calculate estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFRcr-  cys). We estimated the percentage difference (95% CI) in each marker across groups using multivariable linear regression.

Results Compared with farmers with never/low atrazine use, continuous users had statistically significantly lower eGFRcr-  cys (-9.4%; 95% CI -16.1% to -2.2%) and higher serum creatinine (9.4%; 95% CI: 1.6% to 17.9%) and cystatin C (10.8%; 95% CI 2.0% to 20.4%); no associations with these markers were observed for the former high users. We also observed higher uric acid for both former high and continuous users and lower urea nitrogen for former high users, although these associations were not statistically significant. Urine albumin-  creatinine ratio and KIM-  1 levels did not differ across groups.

Conclusions Our findings add to the evidence that continued atrazine use is associated with diminished kidney function.

## INTRODUCTION

Atrazine, a chlorotriazine herbicide used for broadleaf  and  grassy  weed  control  on  corn  and  other crops, is the second most commonly applied herbicide  active  ingredient  in  US  agriculture. 1 After application, atrazine moves readily into surface and groundwater, where levels can persist; elevated atrazine concentrations in ground, surface and drinking

## WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC

- ⇒ Occupational use of atrazine, a triazine herbicide widely used in the USA, has been linked to an increased risk of both kidney cancer and end-  stage kidney disease, though the biological plausibility of these associations remains unclear.

## WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS

- ⇒ We investigated the timing and frequency of atrazine use in relation to estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and other markers of kidney function and nephrotoxicity among male farmers in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture study. In this study, we observed lower eGFR and higher serum creatinine and cystatin C among farmers with continuous (both past and recent) atrazine use compared with those with never use or low lifetime use.

## HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH, PRACTICE OR POLICY

- ⇒ Our findings add to the limited mechanistic evidence in humans regarding the biological plausibility of previously observed associations with atrazine for malignant and non-  malignant kidney disease and may help inform future hazard identification efforts for this widely used herbicide.

water, particularly in agricultural areas, have been documented in the USA 2 and elsewhere. 3 Concerns about water contamination and its effects on wildlife contributed to the European Union's decision to ban atrazine use in 2004. 4

Evidence  for  associations  between  atrazine  and human health effects is inconsistent. 5 A recent investigation  in  the  Agricultural  Health  Study  (AHS), a large prospective cohort of pesticide applicators residing in Iowa and North Carolina, found positive  exposure-  response  associations  between  atrazine use and several malignancies including kidney cancer, 6 which  is  consistent  with  findings  from  a prior  analysis  in  the  AHS. 7 Atrazine  use  has  also been linked to an increased risk of end stage kidney disease  in  the  AHS 8 and  with  lower  estimated

Library GST No R129347480, Laboratory .

glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) among pesticide applicators in the  Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture (BEEA) study, a molecular epidemiological subcohort within the AHS, 9 and this herbicide has also been shown to induce kidney damage and  renal  dysfunction  in  rats. 10-14 However,  few  studies  have investigated occupational atrazine use in relation to other clinical markers of kidney dysfunction, several of which have been implicated in the development of kidney cancer in prospective studies. 15-18 As such, the biological plausibility of the observed associations  between  atrazine  use  and  malignant  and  nonmalignant kidney disease remains unclear. To address this gap, we further investigated the associations of continuous atrazine use  and  historically  high  lifetime  atrazine  use  with  additional markers  of  kidney  function  and  nephrotoxicity  among  male pesticide applicators in the BEEA study.

## METHODS

BEEA includes 1681 male pesticide applicators from the AHS who were ≥50 years of age, residing in Iowa or North Carolina, and free of cancer (except non-  melanoma skin cancer) at the time of enrolment (2010-2017). 19 Information on pesticide use was collected from questionnaires administered at BEEA enrolment and earlier AHS surveys (1993-1997, 1999-2003, 2005-2010).

For the current study, we excluded 477 BEEA participants who were  enrolled  during  winter  (December-February)  to  reduce potential confounding by season. Three groups of participants were then selected based on the timing and frequency/intensity of atrazine use, as follows: (1) participants who reported atrazine use both within the last 3  months prior to BEEA enrolment and in previous AHS questionnaires (continuous users); (2) participants who were in the top tertile of total lifetime days (LDs) of atrazine use (≥178.5 LDs) but had no use within the last 12 months (former high users) and (3) a reference group of participants who never used atrazine or reported minimal past use (ie, those with no use since at least 2003 and who were in the bottom tertile of LDs) (never/low users). Each group included 88 participants who were frequency-  matched on age (5-  year groups) and state of residence (Iowa, North Carolina) (N=264). To maximise exposure  contrast  across  groups,  we  restricted  continuous  users  to those with ≥50 LDs of atrazine use (N=83) and reference group participants to those with &lt;50 LDs of use (N=75) leaving a total of 246 participants (a flow chart summarising the selection of this study population is shown in online supplemental figure 1).

Serum and first  morning  void  urine  samples  were  collected from participants on the day of the BEEA home visit and interview. Samples were shipped cold to a central processing laboratory; after being aliquoted, they were transferred for long-  term storage  at  -80 ℃ .  Using  these  banked  samples,  we  measured creatinine  (mg/dL),  cystatin  C  (mg/L),  uric  acid  (mg/dL),  and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) (mg/dL) in serum, and kidney injury molecule-  1  (KIM-  1)  (pg/mL),  albumin  (mg/L),  and  creatinine (mg/dL)  in  urine.  KIM-  1  concentrations  were  measured  using a  microbead-  based  assay  as  described  previously. 20 Cystatin  C was measured using Gentian reagents (Gentian, Moss, Norway) on  the  COBAS  8000  chemistry  analyser  (Roche  Diagnostics, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA). All other markers were measured using  Roche  reagents  on  the  COBAS  8000  chemistry  analyser  (Roche  Diagnostics).  Samples  from  each  of  the  exposure groups  were  distributed  evenly  across  all  of  the  batches.  For 24 participants with urine albumin levels below the lower limit of  detection (LOD; 1  mg/L), we imputed values of half of the LOD (0.5 mg/L). We calculated eGFR using the 2021 CKD-  EPI creatinine-  cystatin C equation (eGFRcr-  cys), as well as the 2021

CKD-  EPI creatinine equation (eGFRcr) and the 2012 CKD-  EPI cystatin C equation (eGFRcys). 21 The ratio of urine albumin to creatinine (ACR) (mg/g Cr) was also calculated. Based on blinded quality control samples interspersed within and across batches, for the serum markers the overall coefficients of variation (CVs) were ≤3.8% and intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) were ≥0.99; for the urine markers, the CVs were ≤29.6% and ICCs were ≥0.92 (online supplemental table 1).

Multivariable linear regression using the natural logtransformed concentration of each biomarker as the dependent variable was used to estimate the percentage difference in the geometric mean (95% CI) between the atrazine-  exposed groups and the reference group. Exposure-  response associations were conducted  using  tertiles  of  LDs  of  atrazine  use  in  the  former high and continuous user groups separately compared with the reference  group.  We  also  performed  exposure-  response  analyses based on intensity-  weighted LDs of atrazine use, a metric that incorporates information on factors that can influence the magnitude  of  exposure. 22 Trend  tests  were  performed  using the  median  value  of  LDs  or  IWLDs  in  each  atrazine-  exposed tertile.  All  models  were  adjusted  for  age  at  sample  collection, state, body mass index (BMI), smoking status, alcohol, diabetes, hypertension and season of sample collection, as well as pesticides correlated with atrazine use in the last 12 months or ever/ never lifetime atrazine use (Pearson's ρ &gt;0.40: use of acetochlor, glyphosate, mesotrione and metolachlor in last 12 months and lifetime  ever/never  use  of  cyanazine).  In  addition,  analyses of  urine  KIM-  1  were  further  adjusted  for  continuous  natural log-  transformed  urine  creatinine  as  a  covariate  to  account  for urinary dilution. 23

To  assess  the  potential  impact  of  short-  term  exposures  on kidney  markers,  we  performed  sensitivity  analyses  excluding continuous users who reported using atrazine within the last 30 days prior to sample collection, and we also performed sensitivity analyses restricted to Iowa participants (&gt;90% of the study population). All tests were two-  sided, and statistical significance was assessed using a p&lt;0.05.

## RESULTS

Selected  characteristics  of  the  participants  in  each  group  are reported in table 1. Participants in the former high atrazine use group were somewhat older (average age: 62.5 years) than the continuous  users  (average  age:  59.6  years)  and  the  never/low users  (average  age:  59.9  years).  The  continuous  users  had  the lowest proportions of ever smoking and obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/ m 2 ), and the former high use group had the highest proportions of history of diabetes, hypertension and heart disease. By design, the study groups differed not only with respect to the timing of atrazine use but also the frequency of use (eg, mean LDs of atrazine use were 12.5, 255.5 and 424.2 in the never/low, continuous  and  former  high  use  groups,  respectively).  The  median (IQR) values of each of the measured markers are also shown in table 1. We note that the vast majority of participants in each of the three groups (89%-94%) would not meet the classification of possible chronic kidney disease defined as having an eGFR value  &lt;60  mL/min/1.73  m 2 or  a  urine  ACR  value  &gt;30  mg/g creatinine. 24

The multivariable-  adjusted estimates of percentage differences in marker concentrations across atrazine use groups are shown in table 2. Compared with the referent group, continuous atrazine users  had  statistically  significantly  lower  eGFRcr-  cys  (-9.4%; 95% CI -16.1% to -2.2%) and higher serum creatinine (9.4%; 95% CI 1.6% to 17.9%) and cystatin C (10.8%; 95% CI 2.0% to

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

Library GST No R129347480, Laboratory .

Table 1 Selected characteristics of the study population by timing and frequency of atrazine use

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 1 Selected characteristics of the study population by timing and frequency of atrazine use</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Characteristics*</th><th>Continuous†</th><th colspan="3">Former high‡</th><th colspan="2">Never/low§</th></tr><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>%</td><td>N</td><td>%</td><td>N</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>83</td><td>100.0</td><td>88</td><td>100.0</td><td>75</td><td>100.0</td></tr><tr><td>Age at sample collection, mean (SD)</td><td>83</td><td>59.6 (7.3)</td><td>88</td><td>62.5 (6.4)</td><td>75</td><td>59.9 (7.2)</td></tr><tr><th>State of residence</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Iowa</td><td>76</td><td>91.6</td><td>81</td><td>92.0</td><td>69</td><td>92.0</td></tr><tr><td>North Carolina</td><td>7</td><td>8.4</td><td>7</td><td>8.0</td><td>6</td><td>8.0</td></tr><tr><th>Race</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>White</td><td>82</td><td>98.8</td><td>88</td><td>100.0</td><td>75</td><td>100.0</td></tr><tr><td>Other</td><td>1</td><td>1.2</td><td>0</td><td>0.0</td><td>0</td><td>0.0</td></tr><tr><th>Education</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>High school or less</td><td>40</td><td>48.2</td><td>37</td><td>42.0</td><td>33</td><td>44.0</td></tr><tr><td>More than high school</td><td>42</td><td>50.6</td><td>51</td><td>58.0</td><td>40</td><td>53.3</td></tr><tr><td>Missing</td><td>1</td><td>1.2</td><td>0</td><td>0.0</td><td>2</td><td>2.7</td></tr><tr><th>Body mass index (kg/m 2 )</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>&lt;25</td><td>8</td><td>9.6</td><td>10</td><td>11.4</td><td>11</td><td>14.7</td></tr><tr><td>25-29</td><td>44</td><td>53.0</td><td>37</td><td>42.0</td><td>31</td><td>41.3</td></tr><tr><td>≥30</td><td>31</td><td>37.3</td><td>41</td><td>46.6</td><td>33</td><td>44.0</td></tr><tr><th>Cigarette smoking</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Never</td><td>61</td><td>73.5</td><td>52</td><td>59.1</td><td>47</td><td>62.7</td></tr><tr><td>Former</td><td>18</td><td>21.7</td><td>33</td><td>37.5</td><td>23</td><td>30.7</td></tr><tr><td>Current</td><td>4</td><td>4.8</td><td>3</td><td>3.4</td><td>5</td><td>6.7</td></tr><tr><th>Number of alcoholic drinks in</th><th>the last week</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>31</td><td>37.3</td><td>37</td><td>42.0</td><td>37</td><td>49.3</td></tr><tr><td>≤4</td><td>29</td><td>34.9</td><td>26</td><td>29.5</td><td>22</td><td>29.3</td></tr><tr><td>&gt;4</td><td>23</td><td>27.7</td><td>25</td><td>28.4</td><td>16</td><td>21.3</td></tr><tr><th>Diabetes</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>No</td><td>82</td><td>98.8</td><td>73</td><td>83.0</td><td>66</td><td>88.0</td></tr><tr><td>Yes</td><td>1</td><td>1.2</td><td>15</td><td>17.0</td><td>9</td><td>12.0</td></tr><tr><th>Hypertension</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>No</td><td>53</td><td>63.9</td><td>49</td><td>55.7</td><td>48</td><td>64.0</td></tr><tr><td>Yes</td><td>30</td><td>36.1</td><td>39</td><td>44.3</td><td>27</td><td>36.0</td></tr><tr><th>Season of sample collection</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Spring</td><td>14</td><td>16.9</td><td>35</td><td>39.8</td><td>27</td><td>36.0</td></tr><tr><td>Summer</td><td>61</td><td>73.5</td><td>32</td><td>36.4</td><td>20</td><td>26.7</td></tr><tr><td>Fall</td><td>8</td><td>9.6</td><td>21</td><td>23.9</td><td>28</td><td>37.3</td></tr><tr><td>Mean (range) lifetime days atrazine use</td><td>83</td><td>255.5 (50-937.3)</td><td>88</td><td>424.2 (178.5-2858.5)</td><td>75</td><td>12.5 (0-44.5)</td></tr><tr><th>Serum markers, median (IQR)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>eGFR cr-cys (mL/min/1.73m 2</td><td>83</td><td>95.3 (84.9-107.4)</td><td>88</td><td>94.2 (84.7-106.0)</td><td>75</td><td>101.3 (84.5-111.5)</td></tr><tr><td>Creatinine (mg/dL)</td><td>83</td><td>1.01 (0.91-1.15)</td><td>88</td><td>0.97 (0.88-1.08)</td><td>75</td><td>0.93 (0.82-1.09)</td></tr><tr><td>Cystatin C (mg/L)</td><td>83</td><td>0.86 (0.75-0.97)</td><td>88</td><td>0.86 (0.74-0.97)</td><td>75</td><td>0.81 (0.69-0.93)</td></tr><tr><td>Uric acid (mg/dL)</td><td>83</td><td>5.6 (5.1-6.5)</td><td>88</td><td>5.7 (5.2-6.8)</td><td>75</td><td>5.5 (4.4-6.6)</td></tr><tr><td>BUN (mg/dL)</td><td>83</td><td>18 (15-22)</td><td>88</td><td>17 (14-20)</td><td>74</td><td>18 (15-21)</td></tr><tr><th>Urine markers, median (IQR)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>KIM-1 (pg/mL)</td><td>83</td><td>1285.4 (614.4-1811.1)</td><td>88</td><td>1064.1 (628.6-1916.9)</td><td>75</td><td>1155.6 (625.3-2185.7)</td></tr><tr><td>ACR (mg/g Cr)</td><td>83</td><td>2.4 (1.6-3.9)</td><td>88</td><td>2.5 (1.8-4.7)</td><td>75</td><td>2.5 (1.8-4.2)</td></tr><tr><th>Chronic kidney disease¶</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>No</td><td>74</td><td>89.2</td><td>83</td><td>94.3</td><td>70</td><td>93.3</td></tr><tr><td>Yes</td><td>9</td><td>10.8</td><td>5</td><td>5.7</td><td>5</td><td>6.7</td></tr></tbody></table>20.4%); no differences in these markers were observed for the former high atrazine use group compared with the referent group. The patterns of associations with eGFR were consistent when it  was  estimated  using  other  equations  (eg,  among continuous users, eGFRcr: -8.1%; 95% CI -14.4% to -1.2%; eGFRcys:

-9.6%; 95% CI -16.1% to -2.2%; online supplemental table 2). Both atrazine-  exposed groups had elevated levels of serum uric  acid  (continuous  use:  8.2%,  95%  CI  -1.3%  to  18.5%; former high use: 6.8%, 95% CI -0.4% to 14.5%) and former high users had lower levels of BUN (-6.8%, 95% CI -13.3%

Library GST No R129347480, Laboratory .

Table 2 Percentage difference in biomarkers of kidney function and nephrotoxicity by atrazine use

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 2 Percentage difference in biomarkers of kidney function and nephrotoxicity by atrazine use</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Biomarker</th><th>Atrazine use</th><th>N</th><th>Percentage difference (95%CI)*</th><th>P value*</th></tr><tr><td></td><th>Never/low†</th><td>75</td><td>reference</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><th>eGFR cr-cys (mL/min/1.73m 2 )</th><th>Former high‡</th><td>88</td><td>-2.2 (-7.7 to 3.7)</td><td>0.46</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>Continuous§</th><td>83</td><td>-9.4 (-16.1 to 2.2)</td><td>0.01</td></tr><tr><th>Serum creatinine (mg/dL)</th><th>Former high‡</th><td>88</td><td>2.9 (-2.7 to 9.0)</td><td>0.32</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>Continuous§</th><td>83</td><td>9.4 (1.6 to 17.9)</td><td>0.02</td></tr><tr><th>Serum cystatin C (mg/L)</th><th>Former high‡</th><td>88</td><td>3.4 (-2.9 to 10.2)</td><td>0.30</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>Continuous§</th><td>83</td><td>10.8 (2.0 to 20.4)</td><td>0.02</td></tr><tr><th>Serum uric acid (mg/dL)</th><th>Former high‡</th><td>88</td><td>6.8 (-0.4 to 14.5)</td><td>0.07</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>Continuous§</th><td>83</td><td>8.2 (-1.3 to 18.5)</td><td>0.09</td></tr><tr><th>BUN (mg/dL)</th><th>Former high‡</th><td>88</td><td>-6.8 (13.3 to 0.20)</td><td>0.06</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>Continuous§</th><td>83</td><td>1.0 (-10.0 to 8.8)</td><td>0.83</td></tr><tr><th>Urine ACR (mg/g Cr)</th><th>Former high‡</th><td>88</td><td>-10.2 (-36.2 to 26.3)</td><td>0.54</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>Continuous§</th><td>83</td><td>16.1 (-25.8 to 81.9)</td><td>0.51</td></tr><tr><th>Urine KIM-1 (pg/mL)</th><th>Former high‡</th><td>88</td><td>4.9 (-17.5 to 33.5)</td><td>0.70</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>Continuous§</th><td>83</td><td>2.1 (-25.4 to 39.8)</td><td>0.90</td></tr></tbody></table>to 0.2%), though these differences were not statistically signifi -cant. Urine ACR and KIM-  1 levels did not differ across exposure groups. The associations with eGFR, creatinine, cystatin C and uric acid that we observed among continuous users were similar or slightly stronger after excluding those with the most recent atrazine use (within the last 30 days) (online supplemental table 3), and in general, our results were unchanged after restricting to participants from Iowa (online supplemental table 4).

The percentage differences in the markers by tertiles of LDs for both exposure groups relative to the never/low use group are shown in table 3; the corresponding results for IWLDs are shown in online supplemental table 5. The associations with eGFR and cystatin C were most apparent for continuous atrazine users with the highest LDs of use (LD T3 vs reference group, eGFR: -10.5%, 95% CI  -19.5%  to  -0.6%,  P trend =0.08;  cystatin  C:  13.0%, 95% CI  0.7%  to  26.7%,  P trend =0.06);  patterns  were  generally similar  for  IWLDs  of  atrazine  use.  The  association  for  serum creatine  was  also  most  apparent  for  continuous  atrazine  users with the highest LDs of atrazine use (LD T3 vs reference group, 11.5%,  95% CI  0.9%  to  23.3%,  P trend =0.10).  We  observed  a statistically  significant  exposure-  response  association  between IWLDs of atrazine use and urine ACR among the continuous users  (IWLD T3 vs  reference  group:  77.2%,  95%  CI  -3.5%  to 225.4%; P trend =0.03); a similar pattern was observed for LDs of use, though the associations were smaller in magnitude and the test for trend was not statistically significant (P trend =0.20). For the former  high  users,  the  exposure-  response  association  between higher IWLDs of atrazine use and lower BUN was borderline statistically  significant  (P trend =0.05),  but  the  association  was weaker for LDs of use (P trend =0.16). No exposure-  response associations were observed for serum uric acid or KIM-  1 in either the continuous or former high exposure groups.

## DISCUSSION

In  this  investigation,  we  examined  the  associations  with  the timing and frequency of occupational use of atrazine and clinical biomarkers  of  kidney  function  and  nephrotoxicity  among  a subset  of  male  farmers  in  the  BEEA  study  who  were  largely free  of  overt  kidney  disease.  Of  the  kidney  markers  analysed, eGFR, serum creatinine and cystatin C were significantly associated with continuous atrazine use. The associations with these markers  remained  apparent  among  continuous  users  with  the highest cumulative LDs of atrazine use, although tests for trend with increasing LDs of use were not statistically significant. We observed  non-  statistically  significant  associations  with  higher levels of serum uric acid for both continuous and former high atrazine use, and a non-  statistically significant association with lower levels of BUN for former high use. We also observed an exposure-  response  association  between  cumulative  IWLDs  of atrazine use and urine ACR among the continuous users, though results were somewhat attenuated with LDs of use; the reasons for this difference remain unclear and this finding may be due to chance. We note that the observed subclinical differences in marker concentrations across atrazine use groups, while potentially  informative  for  understanding  the  biologic  plausibility of  previously  observed  associations  with  malignant  and  nonmalignant kidney disease, 6-8 are unlikely to have clinical implications  for  individuals  in  this  generally  healthy  adult  farming population.

Our finding of lower eGFR with continuous atrazine use is consistent with a previous analysis in BEEA reporting a subclinical  -5.1% (-8.8% to -1.2%) difference in eGFR (based on creatinine  only)  among  participants  who  reported  atrazine use in the last 12 months compared with never users. 9 In  the current  investigation,  we  observed  a  similar  association  for continuous  users  in  a  subset  of  BEEA  participants;  compared with the prior study, this investigation featured greater exposure contrast between groups and an improved assessment of eGFR based on the 2021 CKD-  EPI creatinine-  cystatin  C  equation. 21 The  current  study  also  included  an  assessment  of  additional markers of kidney function and nephrotoxicity beyond serum creatinine.  We  also  observed  novel  evidence  of  associations

Table 3 Percentage difference in biomarkers of kidney function and nephrotoxicity by group-  specific tertiles of cumulative lifetime days of atrazine

use

<table><tbody><tr><th>Biomarker</th><th>Atrazine use (tertiles of lifetime days)</th><th>N</th><th>Percentage difference (95%CI)*</th><th>P-trend*</th></tr><tr><td></td><td>Never/low†</td><td>75</td><td>reference</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><th>eGFR cr-cys (mL/min/1.73m 2 )</th><th>Former high‡</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>178.5-234</td><td>30</td><td>-3.6 (-10.4 to 3.7)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>235-369</td><td>31</td><td>-3.8 (-10.9 to 4.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&gt;369</td><td>27</td><td>1.7 (-6.0 to 10.1)</td><td>0.88</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>Continuous§</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>51-126</td><td>28</td><td>-7.5 (-16.6 to 2.5)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>127-264</td><td>27</td><td>-8.3 (-17.7 to 2.3)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&gt;264</td><td>28</td><td>-10.5 (-19.5 to 0.6)</td><td>0.08</td></tr><tr><th>Serum creatinine (mg/dL)</th><th>Former high‡</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>178.5-234</td><td>30</td><td>-0.4 (-7.3 to 7.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>235-369</td><td>31</td><td>4.2 (-3.4 to 12.5)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&gt;369</td><td>27</td><td>5.3 (-2.6 to 13.8)</td><td>0.19</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>Continuous§</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>51-126</td><td>28</td><td>9.8 (-0.5 to 21.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>127-264</td><td>27</td><td>9.4 (-1.4 to 21.4)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&gt;264</td><td>28</td><td>11.5 (0.9 to 23.3)</td><td>0.10</td></tr><tr><th>Serum cystatin C (mg/L)</th><th>Former high‡</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>178.5-234</td><td>30</td><td>7.2 (-1.2 to 16.4)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>235-369</td><td>31</td><td>4.2 (-4.5 to 13.7)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&gt;369</td><td>27</td><td>-3.6 (-11.8 to 5.4)</td><td>0.66</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>Continuous§</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>51-126</td><td>28</td><td>7.8 (-3.6 to 20.6)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>127-264</td><td>27</td><td>7.4 (-4.6 to 21.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&gt;264</td><td>28</td><td>13 (0.7 to 26.7)</td><td>0.06</td></tr><tr><th>Serum uric acid (mg/dL)</th><th>Former high‡</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>178.5-234</td><td>30</td><td>6.9 (-3.1 to 17.9)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>235-369</td><td>31</td><td>7.1 (-3.5 to 18.8)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&gt;369</td><td>27</td><td>6.4 (-4.4 to 18.3)</td><td>0.18</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>Continuous§</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>51-126</td><td>28</td><td>7.2 (-5.1 to 21.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>127-264</td><td>27</td><td>17.2 (3.0 to 33.4)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&gt;264</td><td>28</td><td>9.4 (-3.4 to 23.8)</td><td>0.35</td></tr><tr><th>BUN (mg/dL)</th><th>Former high‡</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>178.5-234</td><td>30</td><td>-10.9 (-18.6 to 2.5)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>235-369</td><td>31</td><td>-2.7 (-11.6 to 7.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&gt;369</td><td>27</td><td>-6.0 (-14.8 to 3.7)</td><td>0.16</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>Continuous§</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>51-126</td><td>28</td><td>4.1 (-8.0 to 17.7)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>127-264</td><td>27</td><td>5.5 (-7.4 to 20.2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&gt;264</td><td>28</td><td>-6.7 (-17.7 to 5.8)</td><td>0.10</td></tr><tr><th>Urine ACR (mg/g Cr)</th><th>Former high‡</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>178.5-234</td><td>30</td><td>-13.3 (-43.4 to 32.9)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>235-369</td><td>31</td><td>0.7 (-35.9 to 58.2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&gt;369</td><td>27</td><td>-11.6 (-44.3 to 40.4)</td><td>0.60</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>Continuous§</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>51-126</td><td>28</td><td>9.8 (-39.6 to 99.7)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>127-264</td><td>27</td><td>23.8 (-34.3 to 133.2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&gt;264</td><td>28</td><td>46.8 (-20.2 to 170.0)</td><td>0.20</td></tr><tr><th>Urine KIM-1 (pg/mL)</th><th>Former high‡</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>178.5-234</td><td>30</td><td>-34.7 (-55.8 to 3.5)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>235-369</td><td>31</td><td>-2.7 (-35.6 to 47.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&gt;369</td><td>27</td><td>-3.5 (-36.7 to 47.2)</td><td>0.74</td></tr><tr><td></td><th>Continuous§</th><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>51-126</td><td>28</td><td>8.8 (-35.5 to 83.7)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>127-264 &gt;264</td><td>27 28</td><td>-33.8 (-62.3 to 16.2) 29.5 (-24.2 to 121.1)</td><td>0.21</td></tr></tbody></table>Library GST No R129347480, Laboratory .

with  continuous  atrazine  use  for  other  markers  not  measured previously, including serum cystatin C and a positive but nonstatistically  significant  association  with  serum  uric  acid.  T aken together with findings from Shearer et  al , 9 our  results  suggest that  recent  and  continued  use  of  atrazine  may  contribute  to early  subclinical  kidney  dysfunction,  in  particular  for  markers reflecting  glomerular  function.  However,  we  did  not  observe associations  with  eGFR  or  other  markers  of  kidney  function among  the  former  high  atrazine  users.  The  reasons  for  these inconsistent findings remain unclear and warrant further investigation, although it is possible that these patterns may reflect differences in effects of long-  term continued use vs intermittent high past use, changing exposure patterns or product formulations over time, or transient effects. Regarding the latter point, although it is possible that the associations with lower kidney function  that  we  observed  among  continuous  users  may  have been attributable to acute kidney injury due to recent atrazine exposure, we think that this is unlikely for several reasons. First, we did not find evidence of an association with KIM-  1, a marker highly expressed in kidney injury. 20 25 Second, the associations among continuous users were similar or even slightly stronger after we excluded those with the most recent use of atrazine; we would have expected these associations to be attenuated if they were driven by acute effects.

With respect to other investigations, although not focused on atrazine use specifically, two other studies evaluated the relationship between general pesticide use and markers of kidney function. A longitudinal study of migrant farm workers in Mexico 26 and  another  study  of  greenhouse  farmers  in  Spain 27 reported significant  decreases  in  eGFR  compared  with  the  respective control populations, and the latter study also observed higher cystatin C and serum creatinine among those with high versus low pesticide exposure. However, to our knowledge, no other studies have evaluated eGFR or other markers of kidney function  in  relation  to  atrazine  in  particular;  additional  studies  in populations with detailed assessment of past and recent exposure to atrazine are needed to confirm our findings.

Strengths  of  this  study  include  the  ability  to  examine  the timing and frequency of atrazine use and differences in several markers of kidney function in a well-  characterised occupational cohort. Previous efforts in the AHS have shown good correlations  between  reported  pesticide  use  and  measured  levels  of biomarkers  of  pesticide  exposure, 28 suggesting  that  exposure misclassification  is  limited.  Also,  we  were  able  to  control  for correlated  pesticides  and  other  possible  confounding  factors such as BMI, smoking status and alcohol consumption. Nevertheless,  we  did  not  have  information  on  some  factors  related to  kidney  health  such  as  hydration,  urine  output  or  physical  activity.  Chronic  or  recent  heat  stress  may  impact  kidney function 29  30 ;  although  we  restricted  to  participants  enrolled in BEEA during non-  winter months and adjusted for state and season of phlebotomy in our analyses to address this concern, it is possible that there may have been residual confounding. We also adjusted for history of diabetes and hypertension, though there could have been residual confounding by disease duration or management (eg, glucose control or A1C levels for diabetes, blood pressure control or antihypertensive medication use for hypertension). Furthermore, we cannot rule out the possibility of  confounding by use of other medications or family history of  kidney disease, though there is little reason to suspect that these factors might differ by atrazine use, and as such, the impact on our findings may be minimal. We also note that our study population comprised male farmers who were nearly all nonHispanic white; additional studies of more diverse agricultural populations  are  needed  to  assess  the  generalisability  of  our results. Finally, since we evaluated seven markers in two exposure groups, we cannot discount the possibility of chance findings due to multiple comparisons. The observed association with eGFR aligns with the previous report by Shearer et al , 9 though confirmation  of  this  finding  and  replication  of  novel  findings for additional markers in other study populations is warranted.

In  conclusion,  our  findings  in  this  study  of  occupationally exposed atrazine applicators suggest that recent and continued use  of  atrazine  may  contribute  to  kidney  dysfunction.  Future investigations of atrazine use and additional markers of kidney function and nephrotoxicity may provide further insights into this relationship and inform our understanding of the biologic plausibility  and  potential  mechanisms  through  which  atrazine may  influence  risk  of  malignant  and  non-  malignant  kidney disease.

Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge Amy Miller, Kate Torres and Marsha Dunn (Westat, Rockville, MD) and Anne Taylor (Information Management Services, Calverton, MD) for study coordination and data management. We also thank the participants of the BEEA study that made this work possible.

Contributors GA: conceptualisation, methodology, formal analysis, writingoriginal draft and guarantor. JJS: conceptualisation, methodology, writing-review and editing. DPS: writing-review and editing. AML: methodology, writing-review and editing. RVR: writing-review and editing. CGP: writing-review and editing. VCC: writing-review and editing. VS: methodology, writing-review and editing. LEBF: conceptualisation, writing-review and editing. ABK: methodology, writing-review and editing. JNH: conceptualisation, methodology, formal analysis, supervision, writing-original draft.

Funding This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the US Department of Health and Human Services (US DHHS), National Institutes of Health (NIH), National Cancer Institute (Z01 CP 010119) and US DHHS, NIH, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (Z01 ES 049030).

Disclaimer The contributions of the NIH authors are considered Works of the US Government. The findings and conclusions presented in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NIH or the US DHHS.

Competing interests None declared.

Patient consent for publication Consent obtained directly from patient(s).

Ethics approval This study involves human participants and was approved by National Institutes of Health Institutional Review Board (protocol #10CN106). Participants gave informed consent to participate in the study before taking part.

Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Data availability statement Data are available on reasonable request. BEEA data release BEEA202109.00V2 was used for this investigation. The data for this investigation will be provided on request as described for the BEEA substudy on the AHS website: https://aghealth.nih.gov/collaboration/studies.html.

Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been peer-  reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.

## ORCID iDs

Gabriella Andreotti https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1096-3324 Dale P Sandler https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6776-0018 Vicky C Chang https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2528-9387 Laura E Beane Freeman https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1294-4124 Jonathan N Hofmann https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1043-5812

## REFERENCES

- 1 Agency, U. E. P . Atrazine case interim registration review decision case number 0062. Washington DC EPA; 2020.
- 2 Roh T, Knappett PSK, Han D, et al . Characterization of Arsenic and Atrazine Contaminations in Drinking Water in Iowa: A Public Health Concern. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2023;20:5397.

8

2

- 3 Urseler N, Bachetti R, Biolé F , et al . Atrazine pollution in groundwater and raw bovine milk: Water quality, bioaccumulation and human risk assessment. Sci Total Environ 2022;852:158498.
- 4 Sass JB, Colangelo A. European Union bans atrazine, while the United States negotiates continued use. Int J Occup Environ Health 2006;12:260-7.
- 5 Arabi S, Heidari-  Beni M, Poursafa P , et al . A review of the potential adverse health impacts of atrazine in humans. Rev Environ Health 2025;40:347-59.
- 6 Remigio RV, Andreotti G, Sandler DP , et al . An Updated Evaluation of Atrazine-  Cancer Incidence Associations among Pesticide Applicators in the Agricultural Health Study Cohort. Environ Health Perspect 2024;132:27010.
- 7 Andreotti G, Beane Freeman LE, Shearer JJ, et al . Occupational Pesticide Use and Risk of Renal Cell Carcinoma in the Agricultural Health Study. Environ Health Perspect 2020;128:67011.
- 8 Lebov JF , Engel LS, Richardson D, et al . Pesticide use and risk of end-  stage renal disease among licensed pesticide applicators in the Agricultural Health Study. Occup Environ Med 2016;73:3-12.
- 9 Shearer JJ, Sandler DP , Andreotti G, et al . Pesticide use and kidney function among farmers in the Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture study. Environ Res 2021;199:111276.
- 10 Santa María C, Vilas MG, Muriana FG, et al . Subacute atrazine treatment effects on rat renal functions. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 1986;36:325-31.
- 11 Jestadi DB, Phaniendra A, Babji U, et al . Effects of short term exposure of atrazine on the liver and kidney of normal and diabetic rats. J Toxicol 2014;2014:536759.
- 12 Liu W, Du Y , Liu J, et al . Effects of atrazine on the oxidative damage of kidney in Wister rats. Int J Clin Exp Med 2014;7:3235-43.
- 13 Wang T, Huang X, Liu J, et al . Prolonged exposure to the herbicide atrazine promotes kidney fibrosis by activating Wnt/ β -catenin signaling in rats. Environ Toxicol 2023;38:1143-52.
- 14 Khozimy A, El-  Danasoury H, Abuzeid M. Biochemical Effects of Treatments with Herbicide Atrazine in Male Albino Rats. Journal of the Advances in Agricultural Researches 2022;27:43-57.
- 15 Lowrance WT, Ordoñez J, Udaltsova N, et al . CKD and the risk of incident cancer. J Am Soc Nephrol 2014;25:2327-34.
- 16 Scelo G, Muller DC, Riboli E, et al . KIM-  1 as a Blood-  Based Marker for Early Detection of Kidney Cancer: A Prospective Nested Case-  Control Study. Clin Cancer Res 2018;24:5594-601.

8

2

- 17 Dai XY, He QS, Jing Z, et al . Serum uric acid levels and risk of kidney cancer incidence and mortality: A prospective cohort study. Cancer Med 2020;9:5655-61.
- 18 Park J, Shin DW, Han K, et al . Associations Between Kidney Function, Proteinuria, and the Risk of Kidney Cancer: A Nationwide Cohort Study Involving 10 Million Participants. Am J Epidemiol 2021;190:2042-52.
- 19 Hofmann JN, Beane Freeman LE, Lynch CF, et al . The Biomarkers of Exposure and Effect in Agriculture (BEEA) Study: Rationale, Design, Methods, and Participant Characteristics. J Toxicol Environ Health A 2015;78:1338-47.
- 20 Sabbisetti VS, Waikar SS, Antoine DJ, et al . Blood kidney injury molecule-  1 is a biomarker of acute and chronic kidney injury and predicts progression to ESRD in type I diabetes. J Am Soc Nephrol 2014;25:2177-86.
- 21 Inker LA, Eneanya ND, Coresh J, et al . New Creatinine- and Cystatin C-  Based Equations to Estimate GFR without Race. N Engl J Med 2021;385:1737-49.
- 22 Coble J, Thomas KW, Hines CJ, et al . An updated algorithm for estimation of pesticide exposure intensity in the agricultural health study. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2011;8:4608-22.
- 23 Barr DB, Wilder LC, Caudill SP , et al . Urinary creatinine concentrations in the U.S. population: implications for urinary biologic monitoring measurements. Environ Health Perspect 2005;113:192-200.
- 24 National kidney foundation. 2023 Available: https://www.kidney.org/quick-referenceguide-kidney-disease-screening
- 25 Bonventre JV. Kidney Injury Molecule-  1 (KIM-  1): a specific and sensitive biomarker of kidney injury. Scand J Clin Lab Invest Suppl 2008;241:78-83.
- 26 López-  Gálvez N, Wagoner R, Canales RA, et al . Longitudinal assessment of kidney function in migrant farm workers. Environ Res 2021;202:111686.
- 27 Lozano-  Paniagua D, Parrón T, Alarcón R, et al . Renal tubular dysfunction in greenhouse farmers exposed to pesticides unveiled by a panel of molecular biomarkers of kidney injury. Environ Res 2023;238:117200.
- 28 Thomas KW, Dosemeci M, Coble JB, et al . Assessment of a pesticide exposure intensity algorithm in the agricultural health study. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol 2010;20:559-69.
- 29 Chapman CL, Hess HW, Lucas RAI, et al . Occupational heat exposure and the risk of chronic kidney disease of nontraditional origin in the United States. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2021;321:R141-51.
- 30 Hansson E, Wegman DH, Wesseling C, et al . Markers of kidney tubular and interstitial injury and function among sugarcane workers with cross-  harvest serum creatinine elevation. Occup Environ Med 2022;79:396-402.

Library GST No R129347480, Laboratory .