<!-- image -->

American Journal of Epidemiology

All rights reserved

Vol. 160, No. 9 Printed in U.S.A. DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwh290

## Pesticides and Lung Cancer Risk in the Agricultural Health Study Cohort

Michael C. R. Alavanja 1 , Mustafa Dosemeci 1 , Claudine Samanic 1 , Jay Lubin 1 , Charles F. Lynch 2 , Charles Knott 3 , Joseph Barker 4 , Jane A. Hoppin 5 , Dale P. Sandler 5 , Joseph Coble 1 , Kent Thomas 6 , and Aaron Blair 1

- 1  Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD.
- 2  Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA.
- 3  Battelle/Centers for Public Health Research and Evaluation, Durham, NC.
- 4  IMS, Inc., Silver Spring, MD.
- 5  National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC.
- 6  Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC.

Received for publication April 7, 2004; accepted for publication May 18, 2004.

The authors examined the relation between 50 widely used agricultural pesticides and lung cancer incidence in the Agricultural Health Study, a prospective cohort study of 57,284 pesticide applicators and 32,333 spouses of farmer applicators with no prior history of lung cancer. Self-administered questionnaires were completed at enrollment  (1993-1997). Cancer incidence was determined through population-based cancer registries from enrollment through December 31, 2001. A lung cancer standardized incidence ratio of 0.44 (95% confidence interval: 0.39, 0.49) was observed overall, due in large part to a low cigarette smoking prevalence. Two widely used herbicides, metolachlor and pendimethalin (for low-exposed groups to four higher exposure categories: odds ratio (OR) = 1.0, 1.6, 1.2, 5.0; p trend = 0.0002; and OR = 1.0, 1.6, 2.1, 4.4; p trend = 0.003, respectively), and two widely used insecticides, chlorpyrifos and diazinon (OR = 1.0, 1.1, 1.7, 1.9; p trend = 0.03; and OR = 1.0, 1.6, 2.7,  3.7;  p trend =  0.04,  respectively),  showed  some  evidence  of  exposure  response  for  lung  cancer.  These excesses could not be explained by previously identified lung cancer risk factors. The usage levels in this cohort are  considerably  higher  than  those  typically  experienced  by  the  general  population.  An  excess  risk  among spouses directly exposed to pesticides could not be evaluated at this time.

lung neoplasms; pesticides

Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio.

Lung  cancer  is  one  of  the  most  frequently  diagnosed cancers in the world, and it is the leading cause of cancer death  (1).  Incidence  and  mortality  trends  for  lung  cancer closely parallel patterns of cigarette smoking, and it is estimated  that  cigarette  smoking  is  associated  with  over  85 percent  of  all  lung  cancer  in  Western  countries  (1).  As  a group,  farmers  in  most  of  these  Western  countries  smoke less  than  the  general  population  and,  as  a  consequence, farmers  usually  experience  a  significantly  reduced  risk  of lung cancer and other chronic diseases (2).

Lung cancer risk is causally associated with exposure to arsenical compounds (3), and an excess risk of lung cancer was observed among vineyard workers exposed to arsenic- based pesticides (4) and among arsenical pesticide manufacturers (5, 6). A variety of other pesticides have caused lung tumors  in  rodent  bioassays,  but  the  epidemiologic  data supporting  an  association  for  nonarsenical  pesticides  and lung cancer risk in humans are mixed (7). In a study by Blair et  al.  (8)  and  a  follow-up  study  by  Pesatori  et  al.  (9)  of licensed  pesticide  applicators  in  Florida,  the  risk  of  lung cancer rose with the number of years licensed, with a standardized mortality ratio  greater  than  2.0  among  those licensed for 20 years or more. In a survey of 1,600 agricultural  applicators  in  East  Germany,  Barthel  (9)  observed almost a twofold excess mortality from lung cancer. The risk increased to 3.0 among those with 20 or more years of expo-

Reprint requests to Dr. Michael C. Alavanja, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 6120 Executive Boulevard, Room 8000, Rockville, MD 20892 (e-mail: alavanjm@mail.nih.gov).

Am J Epidemiol   2004;160:876-885

sure (10). Although the specific agent(s) associated with the excess  risk  were  not  identified  by  Blair  et  al.  or  Barthel, Pesatori et al. observed lung cancer excesses with organophosphate  and  carbamate  insecticides  and  phenoxyacetic acid herbicides (9).

A relation between exposure to phenoxy herbicides and/or contaminants (dioxins and furans) and lung cancer mortality was also observed in a cohort of workers from four manufacturing plants in Germany (11) and in a pooled analysis of 36 cohorts  from  12  countries  (12).  Other  studies  of  pesticide applicators  (13,  14)  and  pesticide  manufacturers  (15-17), however, did not show any excess risk of lung cancer. The limited  assessment  of  exposure,  smaller  sample  size,  and inadequate  control  of  cigarette  smoking  in  many  of  these studies underscore the need for improved investigations that focus on specific chemicals.

We examined the exposure-response relation between 50 important agricultural pesticides and lung cancer incidence in the Agricultural Health Study cohort while controlling for many known or suspected risk factors for lung cancer (1, 1823).

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Cohort enrollment

The  Agricultural  Health  Study  is  a  prospective  cohort study of 89,658 people, including 52,395 private applicators and 4,916 commercial applicators licensed to apply restricted-use pesticides and 32,347 spouses of private applicators  from  Iowa  and  North  Carolina.  Private  applicators were farmers or nursery workers, and commercial applicators  were  persons  employed  by  pest  control  companies  or businesses  that  use  pesticides.  Pesticide  applicators  were enrolled when they completed an enrollment questionnaire. In Iowa, both commercial and farmer applicators attend the same pesticide certification testing sessions, and both were invited to participate in the study. In North Carolina, because private  applicators  attended  separate  training,  only  private applicators were enrolled. Private and commercial applicators were also asked to complete 'take-home' questionnaires that  sought  more  extensive  information  on  occupational activities.  Recruitment  of  applicators  and  their  spouses began  in  December  1993  and  continued  until  December 1997.

## Questionnaires

The enrollment  questionnaire  sought  information  on  the use of 50 pesticides (ever/never), crops grown and livestock raised, pesticide application methods used, personal protective equipment used, other agricultural activities and exposures,  smoking,  alcohol  consumption,  fruit  and  vegetable intake,  medical  conditions,  medical  conditions  in  firstdegree relatives including a history of lung cancer, and basic demographic data (all questionnaires and publications resulting from this study are listed at http:// www.aghealth.org). For 22 of the 50 pesticides in the applicator  enrollment  questionnaire,  we  also  obtained  information on the duration of use (years), frequency of use (days per year) and information on application methods, and use of protective equipment. For the remaining 28 pesticides listed in  the  enrollment  questionnaire,  exposure information was limited to ever versus never used. The take home questionnaire for applicators included detailed use information on the 28 pesticides  reported  as  ever/never  use  in  the  enrollment questionnaire, more detailed information on personal protective  equipment  use,  lifestyle  characteristics,  height  and weight (used for body mass index), farm and nonfarm occupational exposure, multiple vitamin use, and hours spent in strenuous physical activity. The spouse questionnaire collected information only on ever/never use of the same 50 pesticides.

## Cohort follow-up

Cohort members were matched to cancer registry files in Iowa and North Carolina for incident cancer identification and to the state death registries and to the National Death Index to ascertain vital status. One lung cancer case diagnosed  after  enrollment  was  excluded  from  the  analyses because an earlier diagnosis of lung cancer was made prior to enrollment.  Incident  cancers  were  identified  from  enrollment (i.e., 1993-1997) through December 31, 2001. Study subjects alive but no longer residing in Iowa or North Carolina ( n = 875) were identified through personal contacts with the study subject, motor vehicle records, pesticide registration records, and the current address records of the Internal Revenue Service, and they were censored in the year they left the state.

## Analysis

A standardized incidence ratio for lung cancer (controlling for age, gender, and race) was computed relative to the populations of Iowa and North Carolina. Statistical significance of  the  standardized  incidence  ratios  and  95  percent  confidence intervals was based on standard methods (24, 25).

Since  the  follow-up  period  for  case  ascertainment  was about 6 years and the lung cancer incidence rate did not vary appreciably,  unconditional  multivariate  logistic  regression (26) was used to compare lung cancer cases with noncases on a number of factors possibly associated with lung cancer risk.  The  odds  ratio  resulting  from  this  procedure  closely approximates the relative risk (26). In the analysis, we examined  50  pesticides  using  two  different  indices  of  exposure (i.e., lifetime exposure days and intensity-weighted lifetime exposure  days)  and  other  agricultural  activities  and  exposures.

We replicated all analyses  using  two  different  reference groups to assess the risk associated with pesticide use. The first  reference  group  included  all  applicators  who  did  not mix  or  apply  the  specific  pesticide.  They  were  compared with exposed applicators grouped into three tertiles of pesticide use (lifetime days of use). The second reference group included applicators in the lowest tertile of specific pesticide use excluding never users, with the two tertiles of higher use as the exposed groups. In either analysis, if the upper tertile contained 10 or more exposed cases, it was further divided in two for the exposure response analysis. For the 22 pesticides

TABLE 1.   Characteristics of licensed pesticide applicators and relations with the risk of lung cancer, Agricultural Health Study, 1993-2001

<table><caption><div class="caption">TABLE 1.   Characteristics of licensed pesticide applicators and relations with the risk of lung cancer, Agricultural Health Study, 1993-2001</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Characteristic</th><th>No. of lung cancer cases *</th><th>No. of cohort members (noncases) *</th><th>Adjusted odds ratio†</th><th>95% confidence interval</th><th>p trend</th></tr><tr><th>Total</th><td>240</td><td>57,044</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Age (years)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&lt;55 (referent)</th><td>38</td><td>40,009</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr><tr><th>55-59</th><td>41</td><td>5,598</td><td>5.7</td><td>3.3, 10.0</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>60-64</th><td>57</td><td>4,848</td><td>9.8</td><td>5.8, 16.7</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>65-69</th><td>50</td><td>3,482</td><td>11.3</td><td>6.4, 19.9</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>70-74</th><td>35</td><td>1,985</td><td>17.2</td><td>9.3, 32.0</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>≥ 75</th><td>19</td><td>1,120</td><td>14.9</td><td>6.7, 33.0</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Smoking status (pack-years)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Never (referent)</th><td>13</td><td>29,237</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Former: &lt;3.75</th><td>4</td><td>5,564</td><td>1.1</td><td>0.3, 4.0</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Former: 3.75-15</th><td>12</td><td>5,083</td><td>3.3</td><td>1.4, 7.5</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Former: &gt;15</th><td>77</td><td>4,815</td><td>13.8</td><td>7.3, 26.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Current: &lt;11.25</th><td>9</td><td>3,178</td><td>8.3</td><td>3.2, 21.6</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Current: 11.25-28.5</th><td>25</td><td>2,891</td><td>21.8</td><td>10.3, 46.0</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Current: &gt;28.5</th><td>54</td><td>2,962</td><td>24.5</td><td>12.6, 47.8</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Sex</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Male</th><td>237</td><td>55,484</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Female</th><td>3</td><td>1,560</td><td>1.3</td><td>0.4, 4.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Race</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>White</th><td>223</td><td>54,244</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>NA‡</td></tr><tr><th>Black/other</th><td>17</td><td>1,515</td><td>2.1</td><td>0.97, 4.2</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>State of residence</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Iowa</th><td>82</td><td>36,698</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>NA</td></tr><tr><th>North Carolina</th><td>158</td><td>20,346</td><td>1.4</td><td>0.97, 2.0</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Education (years)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&lt;12 (referent)</th><td>75</td><td>5,290</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>0.09</td></tr><tr><th>12</th><td>104</td><td>25,995</td><td>0.8</td><td>0.5, 1.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&gt;12</th><td>45</td><td>23,343</td><td>0.7</td><td>0.4, 1.1</td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>Table continues

cancer  cases  exposed  to  any  single  pesticide.  We  used  a linear trend test to assess exposure response in applicators, treating  the  cumulative score as a continuous variable and also by treating the median of each exposure category as the quantitative score.

All odds ratios were adjusted for age as a categorical variable  (&lt;55,  55-59,  60-64,  65-69,  70-74,  and ≥ 75  years), gender,  smoking  history  by  pack-years  of  exposure  separately for current and former smokers (as a categorical variable),  and  total  pesticide  application  days  of  any  pesticide (continuous  variable).  We  referred  to  this  model  as  the 'reduced model.'  To  control more  fully for potential confounders, we also included variables for nonfarm occupational  exposures,  regular  recreational  physical  activity, alcohol consumption, fruit and vegetable intake, body mass index, medical conditions, medical conditions in first-degree relatives  including  a  history  of  lung  cancer,  race,  state  of residence, license type, and education. This is referred to as the  'comprehensive  model.'  No  meaningful  differences included in the enrollment questionnaire, exposure information  included  1)  application-days/year;  2)  total  years  of exposure; and 3) an exposure 'intensity index' that includes information about the application method, whether the applicator repaired his/her own pesticide application equipment, and  the  use  of  protective  equipment  (27).  Two  exposure indices  derived  from  these  questionnaires  and  used  in  the analysis included 1) lifetime  exposure  days that  were computed  as  follows:  (application-days  per  year) × (total years of exposure) and 2) intensity-weighted days that were computed  as  follows:  (application-days  per  year) × (total years  of  exposure) × (exposure  intensity  index).  Similar detail for the remaining 28 pesticides was available only for the subset of applicators who returned the take-home questionnaire. Results for the 22 pesticides covered in detail on the enrollment questionnaire were compared for those who did and did not complete the take-home questionnaire. We could not assess risk among spouses who personally applied specific pesticides, because there were fewer than five lung

TABLE 1.  Continued

<table><caption><div class="caption">TABLE 1.  Continued</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Characteristic</th><th>No. of lung cancer cases *</th><th>No. of cohort members (noncases) *</th><th>Adjusted odds ratio†</th><th>95% confidence interval</th><th>p trend</th></tr><tr><th>Pneumonia</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No (referent)</th><td>147</td><td>45,020</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>NA</td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>59</td><td>8,758</td><td>1.5</td><td>1.0, 2.2</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Other chronic lung disease (bronchitis and emphysema)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No (referent)</th><td>172</td><td>50,869</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>37</td><td>2,582</td><td>2.0</td><td>1.2, 3.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Asthma</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No (referent)</th><td>193</td><td>50,676</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>14</td><td>3,130</td><td>0.8</td><td>0.4, 1.5</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Family history of lung cancer</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No (referent)</th><td>180</td><td>48,830</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>NA</td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>17</td><td>3,347</td><td>0.7</td><td>0.4, 1.3</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Vegetables (servings/week)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>≤ 4 (referent)</th><td>76</td><td>17,452</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>0.13</td></tr><tr><th>5-7</th><td>77</td><td>18,838</td><td>1.2</td><td>0.8, 1.8</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&gt;7</th><td>53</td><td>15,769</td><td>0.8</td><td>0.5, 1.2</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Fruits (servings/week)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>≤ 2 (referent)</th><td>83</td><td>17,407</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>0.64</td></tr><tr><th>3-6</th><td>82</td><td>20,817</td><td>0.8</td><td>0.5, 1.2</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>≥ 7</th><td>48</td><td>14,681</td><td>0.9</td><td>0.5, 1.4</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Alcohol intake (servings/time period)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Never (referent)</th><td>103</td><td>17,352</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>0.45</td></tr><tr><th>≤ 3/month</th><td>41</td><td>17,186</td><td>0.7</td><td>0.5, 1.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>≥ 1/week</th><td>69</td><td>18,858</td><td>1.0</td><td>0.7, 1.5</td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>were found between the exposure response when analyzed as a continuous or categorical variable, so only the categorical analysis  results  are  presented.  We  computed  odds  ratios using both the reduced model and the comprehensive model. Since the odds ratios for lung cancer did not vary by more than 10 percent for any pesticide examined, we report results of the reduced model here. Trends in lung cancer risk also did  not  vary  meaningfully  when  numbers  of  cigarettes smoked per day or duration of cigarette smoking in  years was substituted for pack-years, so pack-years were used in all analyses. Institutional review boards approved the study proposal  and  the  manner  in  which  informed  consent  was obtained from study participants.

## RESULTS

This analysis included both the 57,284 certified/licensed pesticide applicators and 32,333 spouses of private applicators with no history of lung cancer at enrollment. There were too few cases among commercial applicators to present anal- ysis by individual license type at this time. A total of 2,209 deaths occurred among applicators during the mean followup period of 6.2 years, and 300 incident lung cancers were observed  between  enrollment  and  December  31,  2001. Based on state incidence rates, 622 lung cancer cases were expected, yielding a lung cancer standardized incidence ratio of 0.44 (95 percent confidence interval (CI): 0.39, 0.49).

Smoking cigarettes was a strong risk factor for lung cancer in  the  Agricultural  Health  Study  cohort  for  both  pesticide applicators (table 1) and spouses (table 2). Other significant lung cancer risk factors among pesticide applicators include age, a history of pneumonia, and other chronic respiratory diseases  (i.e.,  bronchitis  or  emphysema)  but  not  asthma. Elevated  but  nonsignificant  excess  lung  cancer  risks  were observed among non-White compared with White applicators  and among North Carolina applicators compared with Iowa  applicators.  Among  spouses,  age,  emphysema,  and chronic bronchitis were enumerated separately in their questionnaire,  but  no  chronic  lung  disease,  race,  state  of  residence, or pneumonia was a significant risk factor for lung

TABLE 2.   Characteristics of spouses of licensed private pesticide applicators and relations with the risk of lung cancer, Agricultural Health Study, 1993-2001

<table><caption><div class="caption">TABLE 2.   Characteristics of spouses of licensed private pesticide applicators and relations with the risk of lung cancer, Agricultural Health Study, 1993-2001</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Characteristic</th><th>No. of lung cancer cases *</th><th>No. of cohort members (noncases) *</th><th>Adjusted odds ratio†</th><th>95% confidence interval</th><th>p trend</th></tr><tr><th>Total</th><td>60</td><td>32,273</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Age (years)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&lt;55 (referent)</th><td>20</td><td>22,679</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr><tr><th>55-59</th><td>9</td><td>3,667</td><td>0.92</td><td>0.3, 3.2</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>60-64</th><td>10</td><td>2,904</td><td>1.8</td><td>0.6, 5.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>65-69</th><td>11</td><td>1,774</td><td>6.0</td><td>2.4, 15.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>70-74</th><td>7</td><td>861</td><td>7.0</td><td>2.1, 22.9</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>≥ 75</th><td>3</td><td>384</td><td>5.1</td><td>0.6, 40.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Smoking status (pack-years)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Never (referent)</th><td>21</td><td>21,974</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Former: &lt;3.75</th><td>4</td><td>2,809</td><td>2.5</td><td>0.7, 8.6</td><td>&lt;0.01</td></tr><tr><th>Former: 3.75-15</th><td>6</td><td>1,448</td><td>3.6</td><td>1.1, 13.5</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Former: &gt;15</th><td>9</td><td>875</td><td>10.1</td><td>3.8, 27.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Current: &lt;11.25</th><td>2</td><td>1,428</td><td>2.0</td><td>0.3, 15.8</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr><tr><th>Current: 11.25-28.5</th><td>6</td><td>1,110</td><td>7.6</td><td>2.3, 24.4</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Current: &gt;28.5</th><td>11</td><td>567</td><td>13.8</td><td>4.7, 40.4</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Sex</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Female</th><td>58</td><td>32,056</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>NA‡</td></tr><tr><th>Male</th><td>2</td><td>217</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Race</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>White</th><td>60</td><td>30,776</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>NA</td></tr><tr><th>Black/other</th><td>0</td><td>546</td><td>NA</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>State of residence</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Iowa</th><td>35</td><td>21,728</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>NA</td></tr><tr><th>North Carolina</th><td>25</td><td>10,545</td><td>0.5</td><td>0.2, 1.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Education (years)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&lt;12 (referent)</th><td>7</td><td>1,572</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>0.04</td></tr><tr><th>12</th><td>27</td><td>11,304</td><td>0.98</td><td>0.4, 2.7</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&gt;12</th><td>16</td><td>15,209</td><td>0.4</td><td>0.1, 1.4</td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>Table continues

None of the farm-related activities was associated with lung cancer risk.

Table 4 displays odds ratios for applicators for the seven pesticides  for  which  lifetime  exposure  days  showed  some evidence  of  an  exposure-response  relation.  The  following four  pesticides  exhibited  significant  tests  of  trend  with increased lifetime days of use: metolachlor (chloracetanilide herbicide), chlorpyrifos (phosphorothioate insecticide), pendimethalin (dinitroaniline herbicide), and diazinon (phosphorothioate  insecticide).  The  following  three  pesticides showed significant trends with increasing lifetime days of use when the 'low-exposure group' was used as a reference but not when the 'no-exposure group' was the reference:  dicamba  (a  benzoic  acid  herbicide),  carbofuran  (a carbamate insecticide),  and  dieldrin  (a  chlorinated  organic insecticide, no longer registered for use in the United States). Exposure-specific  data  for  three  of  these  seven  chemicals (dieldrin, diazinon, and pendimethalin) were available only for those who completed the supplemental take-home questionnaire.  No  other  significant  exposure-response  trends, cancer among spouses. Among both applicators and spouses, we observed a reduced risk of lung cancer among those who completed some college compared with those that did not graduate from high school. A meaningful pattern of reduced lung cancer risk with vegetable or fruit consumption was not observed  among  pesticide  applicators.  Among  spouses,  a nonsignificant  reduction  in  risk  was  observed  for  fruit consumption and vegetable consumption, and an unexpected decrease in lung cancer risk was observed among those who consumed  at  least  four  alcoholic  beverages  per  month. Consumption  of  alcoholic  beverages  did  not  appreciably modify lung cancer risk among pesticide applicators.

Table 3 lists selected occupational exposures on and off the farm that were evaluated. Only off-the-farm exposures to asbestos (accounting for 16 exposed lung cancer cases) and lead (accounting for seven exposed lung cancer cases) were associated  with  an  elevated  lung  cancer  risk  (asbestos: adjusted odds ratio (OR) = 2.2, 95 percent CI: 1.3, 3.7; lead: adjusted OR = 2.3, 95 percent CI: 1.1, 5.1) (data not shown).

TABLE 2.  Continued

<table><caption><div class="caption">TABLE 2.  Continued</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Characteristic</th><th>No. of lung cancer cases *</th><th>No. of cohort members (noncases) *</th><th>Adjusted odds ratio†</th><th>95% confidence interval</th><th>p trend</th></tr><tr><th>Pneumonia</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No (referent)</th><td>46</td><td>27,094</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>NA</td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>11</td><td>3,612</td><td>0.8</td><td>0.3, 2.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Bronchitis</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No (referent)</th><td>50</td><td>29,410</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>NA</td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>7</td><td>1,332</td><td>1.4</td><td>0.4, 5.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Asthma</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No (referent)</th><td>50</td><td>29,228</td><td></td><td></td><td>NA</td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>7</td><td>1,507</td><td>1.7</td><td>0.5, 6.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Family history of lung cancer</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>49</td><td>28,023</td><td></td><td></td><td>NA</td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>9</td><td>2,664</td><td>1.3</td><td>0.5, 3.5</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Vegetable intake (servings/week)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>≤ 4 (referent)</th><td>11</td><td>4,022</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>0.09</td></tr><tr><th>5-7</th><td>23</td><td>8,198</td><td>0.93</td><td>0.4, 2.2</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&gt;7</th><td>14</td><td>11,058</td><td>0.6</td><td>0.2, 1.7</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Fruit intake (servings/week)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>≤ 2</th><td>12</td><td>4,151</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>0.09</td></tr><tr><th>3-6</th><td>15</td><td>6,497</td><td>0.90</td><td>0.4, 3.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>≥ 7</th><td>20</td><td>12,689</td><td>0.6</td><td>0.2, 1.6</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Alcohol intake (servings/time period)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Never</th><td>36</td><td>14,030</td><td>1.0</td><td></td><td>0.05</td></tr><tr><th>≤ 3/month</th><td>18</td><td>13,167</td><td>0.5</td><td>0.2, 1.2</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>≥ 4/month</th><td>5</td><td>3,732</td><td>0.2</td><td>0.04, 0.8</td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>either negative or positive, were observed among the other 43 pesticides evaluated in our analyses. For all 22 chemicals listed  in  the  enrollment  questionnaire,  results  were  similar for those who did and did not complete the take-home questionnaire. There were insufficient numbers of spouses with lung cancer who had been exposed to individual pesticides to explore the risk related to direct exposure at this time.

Trends in lung cancer risk with exposure to any of these pesticides  did  not  differ  significantly  by  histologic  type reported by either state cancer registry or by state of residence, but the number of exposed cases for any single histologic type or state of residence was small and these analyses will have to be repeated when additional cases are available. Trends in lung cancer risk with exposure to these pesticides were observed among both smokers and former smokers, but there were too few never-smoker cases to analyze.

For the four pesticides consistently associated with lung cancer  risk  among  applicators  in  our  analysis,  intensityweighted  days  of  pesticide  exposure  generally  produced lower estimates of lung cancer risk compared with lifetime exposure days. Metolachlor and pendimethalin (for highest vs. nonexposed groups: OR = 2.3, 95 percent CI: 0.9, 5.5, p trend = 0.67; and OR = 4.4, 95 percent CI: 1.1, 17.6, p trend = 0.95, respectively) and chlorpyrifos and diazinon (for highest vs. nonexposed groups: OR = 1.8, 95 percent CI: 1.0, 3.2, p trend = 0.04; and OR = 1.4, 95 percent CI: 0.6, 3.8, p trend = 0.21, respectively) showed an increase in lung cancer risk with increasing use of the pesticides, but the trend was significant only for chlorpyrifos.

## DISCUSSION

Consistent with earlier reports (2), this report found that private applicators, who are mainly farmers, experienced a significantly  lower  risk  of  lung  cancer  compared  with  the general population, likely due to lower smoking rates. We also  found  that  four  heavily  used  agricultural  pesticides, including two herbicides (i.e., metolachlor and pendimethalin) and two insecticides (i.e.,  chlorpyrifos  and diazinon),  were  associated  with  a  significant  excess  lung

TABLE 3.   Farm tasks (days of exposure in lifetime) and offthe-farm jobs (ever vs. never) evaluated for an association with lung cancer, Agricultural Health Study, 1993-2001

<table><caption><div class="caption">TABLE 3.   Farm tasks (days of exposure in lifetime) and offthe-farm jobs (ever vs. never) evaluated for an association with lung cancer, Agricultural Health Study, 1993-2001</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Farm tasks</th><th>Off-the-farm job exposures</th></tr><tr><td>Till soil</td><td>Pesticides</td></tr><tr><td>Drive combine-harvester</td><td>Solvents</td></tr><tr><td>Plant</td><td>Gasoline</td></tr><tr><td>Natural fertilizer (manure)</td><td>Asbestos</td></tr><tr><td>Chemical fertilizer</td><td>X-rays</td></tr><tr><td>Hand-pick crops</td><td>Grain dust</td></tr><tr><td>Milk cows (summer)</td><td>Wood dust</td></tr><tr><td>Milk cows (winter)</td><td>Cotton dust</td></tr><tr><td>Drive truck (summer)</td><td>Mine dust</td></tr><tr><td>Drive truck (winter)</td><td>Engine exhaust</td></tr><tr><td>Drive diesel tractor (summer)</td><td>Solder</td></tr><tr><td>Drive diesel tractor (winter)</td><td>Welding fumes</td></tr><tr><td>Drive gas tractor (summer)</td><td>Electric-arc fumes</td></tr><tr><td>Drive gas tractor (winter)</td><td>Lead</td></tr><tr><td>Weld (summer)</td><td>Mercury</td></tr><tr><td>Weld (winter)</td><td>Cadmium</td></tr><tr><td>Repair engines (summer)</td><td>Other metals</td></tr><tr><td>Repair engines (winter)</td><td>Drilling tools</td></tr><tr><td>Grind metal (summer)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Grind metal (winter)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Grind animal feed (summer)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Grind animal feed (winter)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Clean with gasoline (summer)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Clean with gasoline (winter)</td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>cancer risk in the Agricultural Health Study cohort. Three other  pesticides  including  dicamba,  a  herbicide,  and  two insecticides, carbofuran and dieldrin, exhibited an increasing lung cancer risk with increasing lifetime days of use when the 'low-exposure' group was used as the referent group but not when the 'nonexposed' group was used as the referent group. These significant trends with lung cancer risk were observed  after  controlling  for  cigarette  smoking,  age,  and other  potential  confounding  risk  factors.  In  addition,  no meaningful  differences  in  our  results  were  found  between the cohort members who completed the take-home questionnaire  (i.e.,  40  percent  applicators)  and  those  that  did  not, consistent with earlier observations made on this cohort (28). In a small nested case-control study of structural pesticide applicators in Florida, diazinon and the class of organophosphate  and  carbamate  insecticide  showed  an  approximate twofold excess lung cancer risk (9).

The four pesticides observed (i.e., metoachlor, pendimethalin, chlorpyrifos, and diazinon) have a significant exposure-response relation with lung cancer but did not have as  strong  an  exposure  response  when  intensity-weighted exposure days were used as an exposure metric. Since the current intensity index developed for the Agricultural Health Study gives particular weight to dermal exposure and not to potentially  more  relevant  respiratory  exposure  (27),  lung cancer risk estimates based on the intensity index may result in increased random error. Further insight into this exposure metric should be possible once field measures of pesticide exposure associated with work practices become available for the Agricultural Health Study cohort. Since we evaluated 50 pesticides and had no strong a priori hypotheses linking specific pesticides with human lung cancer risk, we cannot rule out the possibility that these are chance findings. We did not make adjustments for multiple comparisons because the appropriate methods are problematic when individual pesticides-specific analyses are not independent, as in our data.

A total of 44,193 cohort members (more than 77 percent of the cohort) were exposed to at least one of these seven pesticides  (i.e.,  chlorpyrifos,  diazinon,  pendimethalin,  metolachlor,  dieldrin,  dicamba,  carbofuran),  while  a  total  of approximately 29.1 percent were exposed to three or more of these  pesticides.  These  results  suggest  that  a  substantial portion  of  farmers  and  commercial  pesticides  applicators may be at an enhanced risk of lung cancer from working with pesticides currently registered  for use in the United States and other countries.

Almost all the lung cancer cases that occurred in the Agricultural  Health  Study  cohort  were  observed  in  current  or former  smokers.  Although  our  findings  remained  after taking into account lifetime smoking using several different smoke exposure metrics, it is not possible to rule out residual confounding  from  cigarette  smoking.  It  is  also  not  yet possible  to  assess  effect  modification  between  pesticide exposure and cigarette smoking.

We observed a lower lung cancer risk in the lowest exposure days category for dicamba, metolachlor, pendimethalin, carbofuran, chlorpyrifos, and diazinon compared with those never  exposed  to  these  pesticides.  Unidentified  factors present  in  the  nonexposed  group  but  not  in  the  exposed group  might  elevate  risk  among  the  nonexposed  and  be  a source  of  confounding.  In  other  contexts,  authors  have explained  such  an  exposure-response  curve  as  a  result  of hormesis  (29),  that  is,  the  protective  effect  resulting  from exposure to a subtoxic concentration of a chemical. While we are inclined to believe uncontrolled confounding is the most  likely  explanation  for  the  shape  of  these  exposureresponse curves, additional epidemiologic and mechanistic data will be necessary before this question can be rigorously addressed.

Patterns  of  odds  ratios  with  pesticide  exposures  were homogenous by histologic type of lung cancer. However, the power of the  statistical  tests  was  low.  Effect  modification with age or other occupational exposures was not observed. A family history of lung cancer among first-degree relatives conferred a small nonsignificant excess risk of lung cancer among spouses, which is consistent with some other reports (1, 30), but a family history effect was not observed among pesticide applicators.

Table 5 summarizes laboratory results for mutagenicity or carcinogenicity in animal bioassays of the seven chemicals associated with an elevated lung cancer risk in the Agricultural Health Study cohort (7). These data do not support our epidemiologic  finding  linking  pesticide  exposure  to  lung cancer  risk.  No  evidence  of  animal  carcinogenicity  or

TABLE 4.   Lung cancer risk among applicators by lifetime exposure days of indicated pesticide, using two referent groups, Agricultural Health Study, 1993-2001

<table><caption><div class="caption">TABLE 4.   Lung cancer risk among applicators by lifetime exposure days of indicated pesticide, using two referent groups, Agricultural Health Study, 1993-2001</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Pesticide by lifetime exposure days</th><th>No. of exposed cases</th><th>Odds ratio *</th><th>95% confidence interval</th><th>Odds ratio *</th><th>95% confidence interval</th></tr><tr><th>Dicamba (herbicide; benzoic acid)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No exposure</th><td>95</td><td>1.0</td><td>Referent</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&lt;24.5</th><td>21</td><td>0.7</td><td>0.4, 1.1</td><td>1.0</td><td>Referent</td></tr><tr><th>24.5-108.5</th><td>19</td><td>0.9</td><td>0.5, 1.4</td><td>1.3</td><td>0.7, 2.5</td></tr><tr><th>108.6-224.7</th><td>8</td><td>1.1</td><td>0.5, 2.3</td><td>1.7</td><td>0.7, 4.0</td></tr><tr><th>&gt;224.7</th><td>8</td><td>1.6</td><td>0.7, 3.4</td><td>3.1</td><td>1.2, 7.7</td></tr><tr><th>p trend</th><td></td><td>0.15</td><td></td><td>0.04</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Metolachlor (herbicide; chloracetanilide)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No exposure</th><td>96</td><td>1.0</td><td>Referent</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&lt;38.8</th><td>20</td><td>0.6</td><td>0.4, 1.0</td><td>1.0</td><td>Referent</td></tr><tr><th>38.8-116</th><td>20</td><td>1.0</td><td>0.6, 1.6</td><td>1.6</td><td>0.8, 3.0</td></tr><tr><th>116.1-457.0</th><td>8</td><td>0.9</td><td>0.4, 1.8</td><td>1.2</td><td>0.5, 2.9</td></tr><tr><th>&gt;457.0</th><td>6</td><td>4.1</td><td>1.6, 10.4</td><td>5.0</td><td>1.7, 14.9</td></tr><tr><th>p trend</th><td></td><td>0.015</td><td></td><td>0.0002</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Pendimethalin (herbicide; dinitroaniline)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No exposure</th><td>62</td><td>1.0</td><td>Referent</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&lt;20.0</th><td>12</td><td>0.8</td><td>0.4, 1.4</td><td>1.0</td><td>Referent</td></tr><tr><th>24.5-56.0</th><td>10</td><td>1.3</td><td>0.6, 2.5</td><td>1.6</td><td>0.7, 3.9</td></tr><tr><th>56.1-224.7</th><td>6</td><td>1.6</td><td>0.6, 3.8</td><td>2.1</td><td>0.8, 6.0</td></tr><tr><th>&gt;224.7</th><td>4</td><td>3.5</td><td>1.1, 10.5</td><td>4.4</td><td>1.2, 15.4</td></tr><tr><th>p trend</th><td></td><td>0.005</td><td></td><td>0.003</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Carbofuran (insecticide; carbamate)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No exposure</th><td>110</td><td>1.0</td><td>Referent</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&lt;24.5</th><td>21</td><td>0.7</td><td>0.5, 1.3</td><td>1.0</td><td>Referent</td></tr><tr><th>24.5-108.5</th><td>11</td><td>1.1</td><td>0.6, 2.0</td><td>1.4</td><td>0.7, 3.1</td></tr><tr><th>&gt;108.5</th><td>11</td><td>1.6</td><td>0.9, 3.2</td><td>2.3</td><td>1.0, 5.1</td></tr><tr><th>p trend</th><td></td><td>0.08</td><td></td><td>0.05</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Chlorpyrifos (insecticide; phosphorothioate)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No exposure</th><td>104</td><td>1.0</td><td>Referent</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&lt;24.5</th><td>33</td><td>0.97</td><td>0.7, 1.4</td><td>1.0</td><td>Referent</td></tr><tr><th>24.5-103.0</th><td>13</td><td>1.0</td><td>0.6, 1.9</td><td>1.1</td><td>0.6, 2.1</td></tr><tr><th>103.1-116.0</th><td>12</td><td>1.7</td><td>0.9, 3.1</td><td>1.7</td><td>0.9, 3.4</td></tr><tr><th>&gt;116.0</th><td>11</td><td>1.7</td><td>0.9, 3.3</td><td>1.9</td><td>0.9, 4.0</td></tr><tr><th>p trend</th><td></td><td>0.02</td><td></td><td>0.03</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Diazinon (insecticide; phosphorothioate)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No exposure</th><td>65</td><td>1.0</td><td>Referent</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&lt;20.0</th><td>10</td><td>0.93</td><td>0.5, 1.8</td><td>1.0</td><td>Referent</td></tr><tr><th>20.0-108.5</th><td>11</td><td>1.4</td><td>0.7, 2.7</td><td>1.6</td><td>0.7, 3.9</td></tr><tr><th>&gt;108.5</th><td>7</td><td>2.7</td><td>1.2, 6.1</td><td>3.2</td><td>1.1, 8.9</td></tr><tr><th>p trend</th><td></td><td>0.008</td><td></td><td>0.04</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Dieldrin (insecticide; chlorinated organic)</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>No exposure</th><td>80</td><td>1.0</td><td>Referent</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&lt;8.7</th><td>5</td><td>1.4</td><td>0.6, 3.6</td><td>1.0</td><td>Referent</td></tr><tr><th>8.7-50.7</th><td>3</td><td>2.2</td><td>0.7, 7.3</td><td>1.9</td><td>0.4, 8.4</td></tr><tr><th>&gt;50.7</th><td>3</td><td>5.3</td><td>1.5, 18.6</td><td>3.1</td><td>0.6, 16.0</td></tr><tr><th>p trend</th><td></td><td>0.0.005</td><td></td><td>0.27</td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>TABLE 5.   Summary of the toxicity, mutagenicity, and animal carcinogenicity of selected pesticides, Agricultural Health Study, 19932001

<table><caption><div class="caption">TABLE 5.   Summary of the toxicity, mutagenicity, and animal carcinogenicity of selected pesticides, Agricultural Health Study, 19932001</div></caption><tbody><tr><th>Pesticide</th><th>Use</th><th>Toxicity rating (EPA * ,†)</th><th>Mutagenic?</th><th>Animal evidence for carcinogenicity</th><th>Carcinogenicity rating‡</th></tr><tr><td>Carbofuran</td><td>RUP *</td><td>I-II</td><td>Unlikely</td><td>No animal evidence</td><td>None</td></tr><tr><td>Chlorpyrifos</td><td>GUP *</td><td>II</td><td>No</td><td>No evidence for carcinogenicity from studies of rats and mice</td><td>None</td></tr><tr><td>Diazinon</td><td>RUP</td><td>II-III</td><td>Inconclusive</td><td>Improbable; no evidence for carcinogenicity from studies of rats</td><td>None</td></tr><tr><td>Dicamba</td><td>GUP</td><td>III</td><td>No</td><td>Improbable; no evidence for carcinogenicity from studies of rats</td><td>None</td></tr><tr><td>Dieldrin</td><td>Banned</td><td>Not listed</td><td>No</td><td>Shown to be hepatocarcinogenic in mice</td><td>EPA = class B2; IARC * = class 3</td></tr><tr><td>Metolachlor</td><td>GUP; some restricted</td><td>III</td><td>No</td><td>Unlikely; no evidence for carcinogenicity among male and female mice and among male rats; female rats given high doses for 2 years showed a significant increase in new growths, nodules, and lesions in livers at that dose</td><td>EPA = class C</td></tr><tr><td>Pendimethalin</td><td>GUP</td><td>III</td><td>No</td><td>No evidence of carcinogenicity from studies of mice</td><td>None</td></tr></tbody></table>* EPA, Environmental Protection Agency; RUP, restricted-use pesticides; GUP, general-use pesticides; IARC, International Agency for Research on Cancer.

† EPA toxicity rating: I, highly toxic; II, moderately toxic; III, slightly toxic.

‡ EPA  carcinogenicity  rating:  class  B2,  probable  human  carcinogen;  class  C,  possible  human  carcinogen.  IARC  carcinogenicity  rating:  class  1,  human carcinogen; class 2a, probable human carcinogen; class 2b, possible human carcinogen; class 3, not classifiable; class 4, probably not a human carcinogen.

mutagenicity is observed for six of the seven pesticides. A hepatocarcinogen  in  mice,  dieldrin  (which  the  US  Environmental  Protection  Agency  categorizes  as  a  probable human  carcinogen)  is  now  banned  from  the  US  market. Metolachlor is associated with liver lesions in rats administered  high  doses  and  is  listed  by  the  US  Environmental Protection Agency as a possible human carcinogen. Three insecticides, that is, carbofuran, chlorpyrifos, and diazinon, are  considered highly toxic or moderately toxic, while the herbicides are generally considered only slightly toxic.

Other factors that contribute to lung cancer risk in the US population were shown to be significantly associated with lung  cancer  within  the  Agricultural  Health  Study  cohort, including previous nonmalignant lung disease such as pneumonia and other chronic lung  diseases (i.e.,  chronic  bronchitis  and  emphysema),  occupational  exposure  to  asbestos and lead, and socioeconomic status (i.e., years of education). Dietary fruit and vegetable intake, alcohol consumption, and leisure-time physical activity were observed to be somewhat protective among spouses but not among the applicators in this analysis. None of these potentially confounding factors appeared  to  influence  the  observed  associations  between specific pesticides and lung cancer risk.

We found no association between lung cancer in spouses and  direct  use  of  any  of  the  50  pesticides.  Currently,  the number of lung cancer cases among the spouses is relatively small, limiting the interpretation of our data, and the analysis will be repeated when a larger number of spousal cases is available.

This  study  does  have  limitations.  First,  the  exposure weights  used  in  our  algorithm  are  based  on  a  literature review and not on direct measurements of exposure made within  the  study  cohort.  These  weighting  factors  heavily emphasize  dermal  absorption  over  respiratory  exposure, which may be generally appropriate but may be less appro- priate  for  a  study  of  lung  cancer  etiology.  An  exposuremonitoring effort within the study cohort is underway and will help to refine our estimates of exposure in the future. Second,  some  subjects  in  this  study  were  asked  to  recall pesticide use from years ago. For the oldest members of the cohort,  this  was  decades  earlier.  Although  recall  can  be faulty after many years, previous evaluation of this issue has shown that recall of pesticide use by the Agricultural Health Study cohort is comparable with the recall of other variables such as diet and alcohol consumption, which have been used by  epidemiologists  in  other  studies  as  standard  exposure measures (31). Third, follow-up of this cohort is relatively short, and it is not possible to evaluate time-dependent exposures  and  risk.  Fourth,  exposure-response  analyses  were performed  on  50  pesticides,  increasing  the  possibility  that some or all of these findings could result from chance. Fifth, our analysis focused its attention on the active ingredients of formulated mixtures of commercial products used by private and  commercial  applicators.  These  formulations  contain both active ingredients and so-called 'inert ingredients,' and we cannot rule out the possibility that the formulated mixture is responsible for the observed excess lung cancer risk.

The Agricultural Health Study has six principal strengths. First,  the  data  collection  prior  to  the  diagnosis  of  cancer precludes the possibility of case-ascertainment bias. Second, detailed information on exposure for each pesticide, including  years of  use, applications  per  year,  and  applications in a lifetime, was used in the analysis. Third, ascertainment and statistical adjustment for age, smoking history, and other  lung  cancer  risk  factors  mitigate  the  possibility  of uncontrolled confounding. Fourth, the size of the study gives sufficient statistical power to examine the risk of exposure to a number of specific chemical exposures. Fifth, the outcome is  cancer  incidence  obtained  from  population-based  tumor registries, which eliminates issues related to survival when

mortality data are the outcome. Sixth, ongoing follow-up of the Agricultural Health Study cohort affords the opportunity to  repeat  the  analyses  on  new  incident  lung  cancer  cases arising in the cohort.

In conclusion, at least four pesticides widely used currently in the United States and elsewhere have been found to be significantly associated with lung cancer risk. Inadequate control of the effect of smoking and less detailed pesticide exposure information may have masked these effects in earlier studies. Since we evaluated 50 pesticides with few a priori hypotheses linking these pesticides with human lung cancer risk, we cannot rule out the possibility that these are chance findings. Replication of these results in other studies and in continued follow-up in the Agricultural Health Study will  be  necessary  before  any  firm  conclusions  can  be reached.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Ruth Allen and Joy Pierce Herrington for  their  invaluable  technical  assistance  with  the  development of this project.

## REFERENCES

1. Williams MD, Sandler AB. The epidemiology of lung cancer. Cancer Treat Res 2001;105:31-52.
2. Blair A, Zahm SH. Cancer among farmers. Occup Med 1991;6: 335-54.
3. International Agency for Research on Cancer. Supplement no. 7. Overall evaluations of carcinogenicity: an updating of IARC monographs volumes 1 to 42. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1987.
4. Luchtrath H. The consequences of chronic arsenic poisoning among Moselle wine growers. Pathoanatomical investigations of post-mortem examinations between 1960 and 1977. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1983;105:173-82.
5. Mabuchi K, Lilienfeld AM, Snell LM. Lung cancer among pesticide workers exposed to inorganic arsenicals. Arch Environ Health 1979;34:312-18.
6. Mabuchi K, Lilienfeld AM, Snell LM. Cancer and occupational exposure to arsenic: a study of pesticide workers. Prev Med 1980;9:51-77.
7. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Pesticide Programs. List of chemicals evaluated for carcinogenic potential. Washington, DC: Environmental Protection Agency, 2002. (World Wide Web URL: www.epa.gov/pesticides/carlist/).
8. Blair A, Grauman DJ, Lubin JH, et al. Lung cancer and other causes of death among licensed pesticide applicators. J Natl Cancer Inst 1983;71:31-7.
9. Pesatori AC, Sontag JM, Lubin JH, et al. Cohort mortality and nested case-control study of lung cancer among structural pest control workers in Florida (United States). Cancer Causes Control 1994;5:310-18.
10. Barthel E. Increased risk of lung cancer in pesticide-exposed male agricultural workers. J Toxicol Environ Health 1981;8: 745-8.
11. Becher H, Flesh-Janys D, Kauppinen T, et al. Cancer mortality in German male workers exposed to phenoxy herbicides and
12. dioxins. Cancer Causes Control 1996;7:312-21.
12. Kogevinas M, Becher H, Benn T, et al. Cancer mortality in workers exposed to phenoxy herbicides, chlorophenols, and dioxins: an expanded and updated international cohort study. Am J Epidemiol 1997;145:1061-75.
13. MacMahon B, Monson RR, Wang HH, et al. A second followup of mortality in a cohort of pesticide applicators. J Occup Med 1988;30:429-32.
14. Wang HH, MacMahon RR. Mortality of pesticide applicators. J Occup Med 1979;21:741-4.
15. Bond GG, Wetterstroem NH, Roush GJ, et al. Cause specific mortality among employees engaged in the manufacture, formulation, or packaging of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid and related salts. Br J Ind Med 1988;45:98-105.
16. Coggon D, Pannett B, Winter PD, et al. Mortality of workers exposed to 2 methyl-4 chlorophenoxyacetic acid. Scand J Work Environ Health 1986;12:448-54.
17. Ott MG, Olson RA, Cook RR, et al. Cohort mortality study of chemical workers with potential exposure to the higher chlorinated dioxins. J Occup Med 1987;29:422-9.
18. Nomura A, Stemmerman GN, Chyou PH, et al. Prospective study of pulmonary function and lung cancer. Am Rev Respir Dis 1991;144:307-11.
19. Alavanja MCR, Brownson RC, Boice JD Jr, et al. Preexisting lung disease and lung cancer among nonsmoking women. Am J Epidemiol 1992;136:623-32.
20. Wu AH, Fontham ETH, Reynolds P, et al. Family history of cancer and the risk of lung cancer among lifetime nonsmoking women in the United States. Am J Epidemiol 1996;43:535-42.
21. Thune I, Lund E. The influence of physical activity in lungcancer risk: a prospective study of 81,516 men and women. Int J Cancer 1997;70:57-62.
22. Alavanja MCR, Lubin J, Mahaffey J, et al. Residential radon exposure and the risk of lung cancer in Missouri. Am J Public Health 1999;89:1042-8.
23. Alavanja MCR, Field WR, Sinha R, et al. Lung cancer and red meat consumption among Iowa women. Lung Cancer 2001;34: 37-46.
24. Liddel FDK. Simple exact analysis of the standardized morality ratio. J Epidemiol Community Health 1984;38:85-8.
25. Monson RR. Occupational epidemiology. 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1990:105-31.
26. Breslow NE, Day NE. Statistical methods in cancer research. Vol II. The design and analysis of cohort studies. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1987:100-5. (IARC scientific publication no. 82).
27. Dosimeci M, Alavanja MCR, Rowland AS, et al. A quantitative approach for estimating exposure to pesticides in the Agricultural Health Study. Ann Occup Hyg 2002;46:245-60.
28. Tarone R, Alavanja MCR, Zahm SH, et al. The Agricultural Health Study: factors affecting completion and return of selfadministered questionnaires in a large prospective cohort study of pesticide applicators. Am J Ind Med 1997;31:233-42.
29. Calabrese EJ, Baldwin LA, Holland CD. Hormesis: a highly generalizable and reproducible phenomenon with important implications for risk assessment. Risk Anal 1999;19:261-81.
30. Lichtensein P, Holm NV, Verkasalo PK, et al. Environmental and heritable factors in the causation of cancer: analysis of cohorts of twins from Sweden, Denmark, and Finland. N Engl J Med 2000;343:78-85.
31. Blair A, Tarone R, Sandler D, et al. Reliability of reporting on lifestyle and agricultural factors by a sample of participants in the Agricultural Health Study from Iowa. Epidemiology 2002; 13:94-9.