<!-- image -->

## Full length article

## Associations of prenatal glyphosate exposure with child neurodevelopment in a Canadian pregnancy cohort study

Meaghan Hall a , Jillian Ashley-Martin b,* , Christine Till a , Janice Hu b , Bruce Lanphear c , Cynthia Curl d , Tye E. Arbuckle b , Michel Boivin e , Linda Booij f,g , Gina Muckle e,h , Mandy Fisher b , Elizabeth Asztalos i , Maryse F. Bouchard j , Amanda J. MacFarlane k,l , Carly Hyland m,n

a Faculty of Health, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada

- b Environmental Health Science and Research Bureau, Health Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada

c Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada

- d School of Public and Population Health, Boise State University, Boise, ID, United States
- e ´ Ecole de Psychologie, Universit ´ e Laval, Qu ´ ebec, QC, Canada
- f Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
- g CHU Sainte-Justine Hospital Research Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada
- h Centre de Recherche du CHU de Qu ´ ebec-Universit ´ e Laval, Laval, QC, Canada
- i Department of Newborn &amp; Developmental Paediatrics, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada

j Institut National de la RechercheScientifique, Laval, QC, Canada

- k Texas A &amp; M Agriculture, Food, and Nutrition Evidence Center, Fort Worth, TX, United States
- l Department of Nutrition, Texas A &amp; M University, College Station, TX, United States
- m Division of Environmental Health Sciences, School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, CA, United States

n UC Agriculture and Natural Resources, Berkeley, CA, United States

## A R T I C L E  I N F O

Associate editor: Adrian Covaci

Keywords: Glyphosate AMPA Pregnancy Neurodevelopment

## A B S T R A C T

Objective: Glyphosate is the most widely used pesticide worldwide. Few epidemiologic studies have examined the potential for neurotoxicity by glyphosate or its degradate, Aminomethylphosphonic Acid (AMPA). We examined associations of maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations with child cognitive, social, and behavioural functioning in participants enrolled in the Maternal-Infant Research on Environmental Chemicals (MIREC) study.

Methods: Maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations were measured in first trimester spot urine samples. We assessed children ' s cognition (IQ) at 3 4 years of age (n = 572) using the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence-III. Social (n = 566) and behavioural (n = 840) functioning were assessed using parent-report versions of the Social Responsiveness Scale-2 and Behavioral Assessment System for Children-2. We quantified associations between maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations and child neurodevelopmental outcomes using multivariable linear regression models and assessed effect modification by child sex, maternal folic acid, and plasma folate.

Results: Median (IQR) urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations were 0.31 (0.33) μ g/L and 0.25 (0.25) μ g/L. Maternal  urinary  glyphosate  and  AMPA  concentrations  were  not  significantly  associated  with  children ' s cognitive, social or behavioural functioning, and there was no evidence of effect modification. We found a nonsignificant inverse trend between maternal urinary AMPA concentrations and Performance IQ (B = -0.85; 95 % CI: 1.71,0.01).

Abbreviations: AMPA, Aminomethylphosphonic acid; ASD, Autism spectrum disorder; BMI, Body mass index; BASC-2, Behavioral Assessment System for Children, Second Edition; FA, Folic acid; FSIQ, Full-Scale Intelligence Quotient; HOME, Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment; INSPQ, Institut National de Sant ´ e Publique du Qu ´ ebec; IQ, Intelligence Quotient; LOD, Limit of detection; LOQ, Limit of quantification; MIREC, Maternal-Infant Research on Environmental Chemicals; MSAQ, Maternal Self-Administered Questionnaire; NHANES, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey; OP, Organophosphate; PIQ, Performance Intelligence Quotient; SG, Specific gravity; SRS-2, Social Responsiveness Scale, Second Edition; THF, Tetrahydrofolate; VIQ, Verbal Intelligence Quotient; WPPSI-III, Wechsler Primary and Preschool Scale of Intelligence, Third Edition.

* Corresponding author at: 150 Tunney ' s Pasture Driveway Ottawa, ON K1A 0T6, Canada. E-mail address: jillian.ashley-martin@hc-sc.gc.ca (J. Ashley-Martin).

## https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2025.109480

Received 27 September 2024; Received in revised form 4 April 2025; Accepted 16 April 2025

0160-4120/Crown Copyright © 2025 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (  http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/  ).

Available online

17

April

2025

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Environment International

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/envint

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

M. Hall et al.

Conclusion: In  this  primarily  urban  cohort  of  Canadian  mother -child  pairs,  prenatal  glyphosate  and  AMPA exposure were not significantly associated with child neurodevelopment. Further evaluation of glyphosate as a potential  developmental neurotoxicant in a study with multiple urine samples per participant and at higher exposure levels is warranted.

(Jenkins et al., 2024), prenatal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations  were  inversely  associated  with  children ' s  cognitive,  social, communication, and adaptive skills at 24 months of age. To date, this is the  only  study  that  has  investigated  the  associations  between  both prenatal glyphosate and AMPA exposure and neurodevelopment using biomarkers of exposure. Two case-control studies in the United States (Von Ehrenstein et al., 2019) and Thailand (Juntarawijit et al., 2020) found significant associations between prenatal and early-postnatal estimates  of  glyphosate  exposure  and  greater  odds  of  autism  spectrum disorder  (ASD)  and  developmental  delay.  A  U.S.  longitudinal  birth cohort study (Hyland et al., 2021) reported a positive association between residential proximity to agricultural glyphosate use in the postnatal period (ages 0 -5 years) and self-reported depression at ages 16 and 18  years,  suggesting  that  glyphosate  may  also  influence  mood  and behaviour in adolescence. Consistent with these findings, a recent crosssectional study from Ecuador (Chronister et al., 2023) found a significant association between higher urinary glyphosate concentrations and lower social perception among adolescents (aged 11 -17 years) living in agricultural communities. Importantly, most of these studies used government- and self-reported pesticide use data rather than biomonitoring data, which are subject to exposure misclassification, making it difficult to compare exposure levels across studies.

Considering the widespread use of glyphosate-based herbicides and epidemiologic evidence supporting adverse neurodevelopmental effects of  prenatal  exposure  to  other  pesticides  (e.g.,  organophosphates) (Mu ˜ noz-Quezada et al., 2013; Sittiwang et al., 2022; Young et al., 2005), further evaluation of glyphosate as a potential developmental neurotoxicant  is  imperative.  Specifically,  epidemiologic  studies  with  biomarkers  of  maternal  glyphosate  exposure  are  needed  to  understand whether prenatal exposure to glyphosate influences fetal brain development.

To address these gaps, we examined associations between prenatal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations with cognitive, social, and behavioural  functioning  among  children  living  primarily  in  nonagricultural  areas  in  Canada.  We  also  investigated  the  potential  for sex-specific effects given previous findings of sex differences in associations of pesticide exposure with child neurodevelopment (Hyland et al., 2021; Ntantu Nkinsa et al., 2020). Daily folic acid intake from supplements and maternal plasma total folate concentrations were evaluated as potential effect modifiers due to emerging evidence that folate may mitigate adverse effects of some neurotoxicants (e.g., lead, pesticides, phthalates)  (Oulhote  et  al.,  2020;  Schmidt  et  al.,  2017;  Solon  et  al., 2008).

## 2. Methods

## 2.1. Study participants

We analysed data from the Maternal-Infant Research on Environmental Chemicals (MIREC) study, a Canadian prospective pregnancy cohort. The cohort profile and recruitment details have been described previously (Arbuckle et al., 2013). Briefly, pregnant participants were recruited  at  prenatal  clinics  across  10  cities  and  were  eligible  to participate if they were ≥ 18 years of age, able to communicate in English  or  French, &lt; 14  weeks ' gestation,  planned  to  deliver  at  a  local hospital, and agreed to cord blood sample collection. Participants were ineligible if they had known fetal abnormalities, medical conditions (i. e., renal or heart disease, epilepsy, etc.), or reported illicit drug use. Of the  8716  participants  approached  at  prenatal  clinics,  5108  (58.6  %)

## 1. Introduction

Glyphosate, the active ingredient in the herbicide Roundup ® , is the most  heavily  applied  pesticide  worldwide  (Government  of  Canada, 2020; Milesi et al., 2021; Vandenberg et al., 2017). Beginning in 1974, it was registered as a broad-spectrum contact herbicide intended to kill weeds prior to the planting of crops (Benbrook, 2016; Vandenberg et al., 2017). Since then, the use of glyphosate-based herbicides has increased 100-fold,  largely  due  to  the  influx  of  glyphosate-resistant  crops,  and glyphosate ' s high versatility and multitude of uses in agricultural, horticultural, and residential settings (Benbrook, 2016). As such, residues of glyphosate and its environmental degradate, Aminomethylphosphonic Acid (AMPA), are routinely detected in many crops, including soybeans, canola, wheat, and barley (B ø hn et al., 2014; Duke, 2005; Vandenberg et al., 2017), as well as in drinking water (Grau et al., 2022; Rendon-von Osten and Dzul-Caamal, 2017). Higher urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations have been found in people with greater consumption of foods,  like  whole  grain  bread  (Ashley-Martin  et  al.,  2023),  cereal (Ospina et al., 2022), and other processed foods (Fagan et al., 2020). In a representative sample of the U.S. general population, urinary glyphosate concentrations were lower among people who had fasted for more than 8  h,  providing  further  evidence  for  diet  as  an  important  source  of exposure (Ospina et al., 2022). Likewise, adherence to an organic diet was found to reduce urinary glyphosate concentrations among people living farther ( &gt; 0.5 km) from agricultural fields (Hyland et al., 2023). In addition to ingesting glyphosate-contaminated food and water, people living and working in agricultural areas may also be exposed to glyphosate from field applications (e.g., inhalation or dermal contact) (Curl et al., 2023; Mendez et al., 2017; Milesi et al., 2021; Pierce et al., 2020). Further  exposure  to  AMPA  is  possible  through  use  of  phosphonatecontaining household and industrial detergents, as AMPA is also a key metabolite of phosphonic acids (Franke et al., 2020).

In response to the rise in glyphosate use globally, concern about its potential health impact is growing (Vandenberg et al., 2017). Epidemiologic  studies  have  reported  associations  between  exposure  to glyphosate and AMPA and increased risk of liver (Eskenazi et al., 2023) and kidney disease (Jayasumana et al., 2015; Jayasumana et al., 2014), cancer  (Eriksson  et  al.,  2008),  and  adverse  reproductive  (De  Araujo et al., 2016) and birth outcomes, such as preterm birth and shortened gestational age (Lesseur et al., 2021; Silver et al., 2021), among people living in agricultural and non-agricultural communities. Studies have also linked glyphosate exposure to neurodegeneration (Barbosa et al., 2001; Kamel et al., 2012), adverse neurobehavioural outcomes (Beard et  al.,  2014),  encephalopathy  (Malhotra  et  al.,  2010),  and  reduced cognition (Hsiao et al., 2023). Most of these studies, however, involved adults who had direct contact with glyphosate in agricultural communities (Hsiao et al., 2023). Glyphosate toxicity to the body (Liu et al., 2022; Peillex and Pelletier, 2020; Rieg et al., 2022) and brain (Ait Bali et al., 2017; Cattani et al., 2017; Costas-Ferreira et al., 2022; Ojiro et al., 2023; Turkmen et al., 2019) (e.g., impaired immune system functioning, liver damage, depressive-like behaviour, and functional and structural alterations  in  the  nervous  system)  has  also  been  reported  in  experimental studies with mice and rats exposed to glyphosate-treated food and water, via various proposed mechanisms, including oxidative stress (Eaton et al., 2022; Makris et al., 2022). It remains unclear whether this body of literature may generalize to herbicide exposure in gestation.

In particular, little is known about glyphosate ' s potential neurotoxicity during gestation and early childhood, a critical period of heightened susceptibility. In a recent pregnancy cohort study from Puerto Rico

M. Hall et al.

were considered eligible, and 1983 (38.8 %) consented to participate. Of these, 1880 (94.8 %) provided urine samples in trimester one and consented for their storage in the MIREC biobank and use in future research.

MIREC  families  with  singleton  children  between  the  ages  of  15 months and 5 years of age, who were born &gt; 28 weeks ' gestation with no congenital  abnormalities,  major  neurological  disorders,  or  history  of convulsions were invited to participate in a neurodevelopmental followup study (i.e., MIREC-Child Development Plus) (Fisher et al., 2023). Due to  resource  limitations,  in-person  neurodevelopmental  testing  was offered in six of 10 recruitment cities. Of 1207 eligible mother -child pairs, 808 consented to participate in the follow-up study. Of these, 610 (76 %) agreed to child neurodevelopmental testing at 3 -4 years of age; 607, 601, and 600 children completed cognitive, social, and behavioural assessments, respectively. An additional 296 families from the other four sites completed the behavioural assessment (total n = 896) as part of the Maternal Self-Administered Questionnaire (MSAQ), in either a mailed in paper format or online survey (Fisher et al., 2023).

Study procedures were approved by the research ethics boards at Health Canada and all participating hospitals, including CHU de Qu ´ ebec in Qu ´ ebec City and Sainte-Justine in Montreal, which also served as the coordinating center. All participants provided written informed consent at time of enrollment in MIREC and MIREC-Child Development Plus.

## 2.2. Prenatal glyphosate and AMPA exposure

Spot urine samples were collected from pregnant participants during their first trimester at an average of 11.6 [standard deviation (SD) = 1.6] weeks ' gestation. At each study site, urine samples were aliquoted and frozen at 20 ◦ C within two hours of collection. Aliquots were shipped on dry ice to the MIREC coordinating center, where they were stored at 30 ◦ C. From there, samples were sent for analysis at the accredited Toxicology  Laboratory  at  the  Institut  National  de  Sant ´ e  Publique  du Qu ´ ebec (INSPQ).

Glyphosate and AMPA concentrations were measured in maternal urine samples (n = 1880) using ultra performance liquid chromatography  with  tandem  mass  spectrometry  (UPLC-MS/MS),  a  validated method that has been described previously (Bienvenu et al., 2021). In short, urine samples (100 µ L) were enriched with isotope-labelled internal standards, derivatized using a pentafluorobenzyl bromide solution, and extracted with methyl tert -butyl ether from the aqueous matrix using liquid -liquid extraction. Extracts were evaporated to dryness and reconstituted  with  1000 µ L  of  2  mM  ammonium  acetate  in  40  % acetonitrile before being analyzed by UPLC-MS/MS (Waters; Milford, MA, USA). The intra- and inter-day precision ranged from 1.9 to 7.6 % and 4.0 to 8.3 %, respectively, depending on the analyte. Quality and accuracy of the analytical method were verified through participation in the Organic Substances in urine Quality Assessment Scheme (INSPQ, Qu ´ ebec, Canada) interlaboratory program.

Urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations were standardized for urine  specific  gravity  (SG)  to  account  for  variability  due  to  urinary dilution using the following equation (Duty et al., 2005): PC = Pi * SGm 1 SGi 1 ; where PC is the SG-standardized analyte concentration ( μ g/L), Pi is the observed analyte concentration, SGm is the median SG for the cohort (i. e., 1.013), and SGi is the observed SG concentration for the individual urine sample. Urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations below the limit  of  detection  (LOD)  (0.08  and  0.09 μ g/L,  respectively)  were imputed following Lubin ' s method (Lubin et al., 2004) (see section 2.6 Statistical Analysis for further information). Given the right-skewed distribution of maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations, log2 transformation was used to approximate a normal distribution for both variables.

## 2.3. Child neurodevelopmental outcomes

Children ' s  cognitive,  social,  and  behavioural  functioning  were evaluated at 3-to-4 years of age [mean (SD) = 3.4 (0.31)].

## 2.3.1. Cognitive functioning

Intellectual abilities were assessed using the Wechsler Preschool and Primary  Scale  of  Intelligence,  Third  Edition  (WPPSI-III)  [Canadian norms; mean (SD) = 100 (15)]. Testing was conducted in participants ' homes, where efforts were made to create a distraction-free environment. Tests were administered in the child ' s primary language (English or French) by trained research assistants who were blinded to participants ' urinary herbicide concentrations in pregnancy. Integrity of test administration  was  ensured  by  periodic  observation  of  testers  and double scoring of all protocols (Fisher et al., 2023). We used Full-Scale Intelligence  Quotient  (FSIQ),  a  measure  of  global  intellectual  and cognitive functioning, Verbal IQ (VIQ), and Performance IQ (PIQ) as the primary  cognitive  outcomes  of  interest.  Higher  IQ  scores  indicate stronger cognitive abilities.

## 2.3.2. Social functioning

During the neurodevelopmental visit, parents were asked to complete the preschool version of the Social Responsiveness Scale, Second Edition  (SRS-2)  to  assess  their  children ' s  social  abilities.  The  SRS-2 comprises 65 questions on a Likert scale ( ' not true ' to ' almost always true ' )  that  evaluate  the  presence  and  severity  of  social  impairment consistent with ASD. Parents ' responses were scored across five subscales (Social Awareness, Social Cognition, Social Communication, Social  Motivation,  Restricted  Interests  and  Repetitive  Behaviour)  and summed to derive a Total T-score (range: 34 -109) (Fisher et al., 2023). We used SRS-2 Total T-scores as the primary social outcome of interest, with higher scores indicating greater severity of social impairment.

## 2.3.3. Behavioural functioning

Children ' s behavioural functioning was measured using the Behavioral  Assessment  System  for  Children,  Second  Edition  (BASC-2).  The BASC-2 is a 134-item, norm-reference questionnaire that provides an assessment  of  children ' s  behaviour  and  emotional  status.  Parents completed the BASC-2 either during the scheduled neurodevelopmental visit, or by mail or online. Responses were summed and T-scores were derived for eight clinical scales, four adaptive scales, and four composites (Adaptive Skills, Behavior Symptoms Index, Internalizing Problems, Externalizing Problems) [normative mean (SD) = 50 (10)]. Internalizing (Anxiety,  Depression,  and  Somatization)  and  Externalizing (Hyperactivity and Aggression) Problems composite T-scores served as the main indices  of  behavioural  functioning,  where  higher  scores  represent greater emotional and behavioural difficulties.

## 2.4. Covariates

Primary covariates were selected from established factors found to be  associated  with  glyphosate  and  AMPA  exposure  and  metabolism (Ashley-Martin et al., 2024, 2023), and child neurodevelopment (Islam and Khan, 2023; May et al., 2019; Moreno-Gim ´ enez et al., 2022; Sanchez et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2023): maternal age, race, pre-pregnancy Body Mass Index (BMI), parity, level of education, and child sex (assigned at birth).  Race  was  self-reported  by  participants  and  dichotomized  as White or Other, given that most participants in MIREC (86 %) identified as White. Level of education was dichotomized as bachelor ' s degree or higher or college diploma or lower. We also considered a secondary set of precision covariates associated with neurodevelopment: self-reported alcohol  intake  (yes/no)  and  second-hand  smoke  exposure  (yes/no/I don ' t know) in pregnancy, parental depression [mothers ' scores on the 10-item Centre for Epidemiological Studies -Depression (CES-D) scale; range = 0 -30], breastfeeding status (months of exclusive breastfeeding), and study site (n = 10). We also accounted for a continuous measure of the  quality  of  the  child ' s  home  environment  [Home Observation for Measurement  of  the  Environment  (HOME)  score].  HOME  score  was considered  a  primary  covariate  in  all  models  evaluating  children ' s

M. Hall et al.

cognitive and social functioning, and as a secondary covariate in models examining behavioural functioning. This is because HOME scores were obtained for families who participated in the neurodevelopmental visit (i.e., those who completed intelligence testing and the SRS-2). Considering the BASC-2 was completed either during the neurodevelopmental visit (n = 600), or by mail or online (n = 296), HOME scores were only available for a subset of those with behavioural data.

## 2.5. Prenatal folic acid supplementation

Maternal plasma total folate and daily folic acid (FA) intake from supplements were evaluated as potential effect modifiers in all associations of maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations with child neurodevelopmental outcomes.

## 2.5.1. Daily Total folic acid intake from supplements

Data  on  FA  intake  from  supplements  in  pregnancy  was  collected through  a  self-report  Nutrients  Supplement  questionnaire  completed prior to the second trimester visit, or if not reported at that timepoint, from the baseline questionnaire from trimester one. Participants were asked about their supplement intake over the last 30 days. If this information was missing, participants ' responses to a question about 24hour supplement intake were considered. If supplement intake information was still missing, responses to the baseline question about supplement intake over the last 3 months were taken into account. Given that  FA  intake  from  supplements  was  derived  from  three  different questions, it was assumed that supplement intake was the same at all timepoints during pregnancy. Mothers were asked to provide the name and  product  identification  number  for  the  supplement(s)  they  were taking, in addition to the dosage and frequency of intake (Patti et al., 2022). The FA content was determined for each supplement type, as described in Patti et al. (2022) and Oulhote et al. (2020). Total daily FA intake from supplements was calculated for each woman by summing the  FA  content  from  all  vitamin  supplements  they  reported  taking. Maternal daily FA intake from supplements was categorized as below recommended  FA  supplementation  ( &lt; 400 μ g/day),  meeting  recommended FA supplementation ( ≥ 400 &amp; ≤ 1000 μ g/day), or exceeding recommended FA supplementation ( &gt; 1000 μ g/day). The current recommended  FA  intake  from  supplements  for  Canadians  who  could become pregnant, or are pregnant or lactating is 400 μ g/day (Wilson et al., 2015).

## 2.5.2. Maternal plasma Total folate

Maternal  plasma  samples  were  collected  in  trimester  one  and analyzed for five folate vitamers [tetrahydrofolate (THF), 5,10-methenylTHF,  5-formylTHF,  5-methylTHF,  and  unmetabolized  folic  acid] using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, as described previously (Patti et al., 2022). Plasma total folate concentrations were estimated  by  summing  the  concentrations  of  all  five  vitamers,  and categorized as low [ &lt; 10th percentile (64.89 nmol/L)], adequate [ ≥ 10th percentile (64.89 nmol/L) &amp; &lt; 80th percentile (124.89 nmol/L)], or high [ &gt; 80th percentile (124.89 nmol/L)]. Cutoff values (i.e., 10th and 80th percentiles) were selected based on the percentage of participants found to have FA intake from supplements below (i.e., &lt; 400 μ g/ day;  ~6%)  and  above  (i.e., &gt; 1000 μ g/day;  ~24  %)  recommended intake levels.

## 2.6. Statistical analysis

We examined the distribution and descriptive statistics for all demographic, maternal glyphosate and AMPA exposure, and child neurodevelopmental  outcome  variables.  Following  log2 transformation, both exposure variables were normally distributed. Spearman ' s correlation coefficients were used to examine associations between maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations, and child cognitive, social, and behavioural outcomes. We examined visuals (e.g., scatterplots,

LOWESS plots) and explored quadratic models to assess evidence of nonlinearity. In the absence of non-linearity ( Supplemental Table 1 ), we used multiple linear regression in our final models to quantify the associations between maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations,  and  child  cognitive  (FSIQ,  VIQ,  and  PIQ),  social  (SRS-2  Total scores),  and  behavioural  (Internalizing  and  Externalizing  Problems composite scores) functioning. All models were run twice: once with adjustment for primary covariates (maternal age, race, pre-pregnancy BMI, parity, and level of education, child  sex, and HOME score [for cognitive/social outcomes]), and again with adjustment for secondary covariates (maternal self-reported alcohol intake, second-hand smoke exposure, depression, breastfeeding status, study site, and HOME score [for  behavioural  outcomes]).  Regression  diagnostics  were  used  to confirm goodness of fit of the linear models.

Urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentration values that fell below the LOD ( &lt; LOD) (0.08 and 0.09 μ g/L, respectively) were replaced using multiple imputation by bootstrapping with 10 imputed datasets (Lubin et al., 2004). Bootstrap data were generated by sampling with replacement; values &lt; LOD were imputed by random sampling from a lognormal  distribution  using  the  bootstrap  parameter  estimates  (Lubin et al., 2004). We analyzed each imputed dataset using multiple linear regression, pooled the beta coefficients and standard errors across all 10 imputed datasets, and presented the final results. Regression coefficients were reported as the mean change in outcome per doubling in exposure. In the current study, a doubling in exposure represents an increase in urinary glyphosate or AMPA concentration from the 50th to the 75th percentile.

As a secondary aim, we tested for effect modification by child sex, and  maternal  plasma  total  folate  (low/adequate/high)  and  daily  FA intake from supplements (below/at/above recommended intake levels) in trimester one in all models of maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations with child neurodevelopmental outcomes by including an  interaction  term  (sex*,  FA  intake*,  or  folate*  exposure)  in  each model.  Category-specific  effects  were  estimated  for  every  model.  All models were adjusted for primary covariates.

We used STATA version 18.0 (STATA corporation) and R version 4.2.1 (The R Project for Statistical Computing) for all statistical analyses. Exposure values &lt; LOD were imputed using the impute.boot function from miWQS R package (RDocumentation, n.d). Two-sided p values &lt; 0.05  were  considered  to  indicate  statistical  significance.  Interaction terms were considered significant if p values &lt; 0.10.

## 2.6.1. Sensitivity analysis

Given that AMPA is the major metabolite of glyphosate degradation in the environment (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), 2020), we derived a composite variable (i.e., glyphosate + AMPA; μ g/L) to estimate combined exposure to both glyphosate and AMPA  using  the  following  formula:  glyphosate + (1.523*AMPA) (Eskenazi et al., 2023; FAO and WHO, 2019). This formula has been used previously (Eskenazi et al., 2023), and was developed to reflect the ratio of  AMPA ' s  molecular  weight  to  that  of  glyphosate  (~1.523),  while assuming that  both  chemicals  impose  similar  toxic  effects  (FAO  and WHO,  2019).  Glyphosate + AMPA  concentrations  were  log2 transformed after calculating the composite values. Linear regression was used to examine associations between glyphosate + AMPA concentrations and child neurodevelopmental outcomes, with adjustment for both primary and secondary covariates. We also tested for effect modification by child sex and prenatal FA supplementation in these models.

## 3. Results

## 3.1. Participant characteristics

Out of the 1880 participants with available first trimester spot urine samples, 1826 (97.1 %) and 1845 (98.1 %) of the participants had urinary glyphosate and AMPA data (Fig. 1). Demographic characteristics

M. Hall et al.

Fig. 1. Flow chart for participants included in the analytic sample with data on maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA, and child cognitive, social, and behavioural functioning. Note. AMPA = Aminomethylphosphonic acid; FSIQ = Full-Scale IQ; VIQ = Verbal IQ; PIQ = Performance IQ; SRS-T = Social Responsiveness Scale Total T score;  BASC-I = Behavioral  Assessment  System  for  Children  Internalizing  Problems  composite  T  score;  BASC-E = Behavioral  Assessment  System  for  Children Externalizing Problems composite T score.

<!-- image -->

and descriptive statistics for glyphosate and AMPA have been reported previously  for  this  subsample  of  participants  (Ashley-Martin  et  al., 2023).

Among those with data on at least one exposure measure, child FSIQ, and primary covariates (n = 510), mothers were 32.6 years (SD = 4.6) of age at time of recruitment during pregnancy. A large proportion were White (89.8 %), married or common law (96.5 %), had a university degree or higher (67.2 %), and had a household income ≥ $100,000 CAD (40.4 %) (Table 1). Median [Interquartile Range (IQR)] maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations were 0.31 (0.33) and 0.25 (0.25) μ g/L, respectively (Table 1); 77 % and 71 % of urinary glyphosate and AMPA levels were above the LOD, and 48 % and 39 % were above the  limit  of  quantification  (LOQ)  (0.26 μ g/L  and  0.29 μ g/L,  respectively). Mean (SD; range) child FSIQ, VIQ, and PIQ scores were 107.0 (13.6;  51 -143),  109.5  (13.4;  58 -144),  and  103.2  (14.9;  55 -144), respectively. Mean SRS-2 Total T-scores were 45.4 (SD = 6.2; range = 34 -85). Children ' s Internalizing and Externalizing Problems composite T-scores on the BASC-2 were 51.9 (SD = 8.3; range = 28 -81) and 49.7 (SD = 7.9; range = 33 -88) on average. 48.2 % of children were male (Table 1). Sociodemographic characteristics were comparable between the analytic sample and those with behavioural outcome data (Table 1).

Maternal urinary glyphosate concentrations were moderately correlated with urinary AMPA concentrations (Spearman r = 0.56, p &lt; 0.01).

## 3.2. Prenatal glyphosate and AMPA Exposure, and child neurodevelopmental outcomes

Associations of prenatal glyphosate and AMPA concentrations with child cognitive, behavioural, and social functioning were generally null. In our primary  covariate-adjusted linear regression analysis,  we observed an inverse trend ( p = 0.053) between maternal urinary AMPA concentration and child PIQ (Fig. 2). A two-fold increase in maternal urinary  AMPA  concentration  was  non-significantly  associated  with  a 0.85-point decrease (95 % CI: 1.71, 0.01) in child PIQ (Table 2). No statistically significant associations were found between maternal urinary AMPA concentrations and child FSIQ or VIQ, or between maternal urinary glyphosate concentrations and child FSIQ, VIQ, or PIQ (Table 2). We did not observe any substantial differences in any of the associations when the models were adjusted for secondary covariates (Table 2).

Maternal  urinary  glyphosate  and  AMPA  concentrations  were  not significantly  associated  with  children ' s  Total  T-scores  on  the  SRS-2 (Table  2).  No  statistically  significant  associations  were  observed  between  maternal  urinary  glyphosate  and  AMPA  concentrations,  and children ' s  Internalizing or Externalizing Problems composite T-scores (Table 2). Results did not differ when models were adjusted for primary vs secondary covariates (Table 2).

## 3.3. Effect modification by child sex

The interaction between maternal urinary glyphosate concentration and  child  sex  in  the  child  VIQ  model  was  statistically  significant  ( p interaction term = 0.050) ( Supplemental Fig. 1 ). While the slopes for

M. Hall et al.

Table 1 Demographic characteristics.

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 1 Demographic characteristics.</div></caption><tbody><tr><td></td><th>Exposure + FSIQ + 1 covariate data a</th><th>Exposure + BASC + 1 ◦ covariate data b</th></tr><tr><th>N</th><td>510</td><td>783</td></tr><tr><th>Maternal age (years; mean; SD)</th><td>32.6 (4.6)</td><td>32.8 (4.7)</td></tr><tr><th>Race ( n ; %)</th><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>White</th><td>458 (89.8)</td><td>709 (90.6)</td></tr><tr><th>Other</th><td>52 (10.2)</td><td>74 (9.4)</td></tr><tr><th>Marital status (n; %)</th><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Married or common law</th><td>492 (96.5)</td><td>756 (96.6)</td></tr><tr><th>Single Level of education ( n ; %)</th><td>18 (3.5)</td><td>27 (3.4)</td></tr><tr><th>College diploma or less</th><td>167 (32.8)</td><td>245 (31.3)</td></tr><tr><th>University degree</th><td>343 (67.2)</td><td>538 (68.7)</td></tr><tr><th>Household income ( n ; %)</th><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>&lt; 100,000 CAD</th><td>287 (56.3)</td><td>436 (55.7)</td></tr><tr><th>≥ 100,000 CAD</th><td>206 (40.4)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>319 (40.7)</td></tr><tr><th>Did not disclose Parity ( n ; %)</th><td>17 (3.3)</td><td>28 (3.6)</td></tr><tr><th>0</th><td>223 (43.7)</td><td>343 (43.8)</td></tr><tr><th>1</th><td>209 (41.0)</td><td>328 (41.9)</td></tr><tr><th>2 +</th><td>78 (15.3)</td><td>112 (14.3)</td></tr><tr><th>Pre-pregnancy BMI (kg/m 2 ; mean; SD)</th><td>25.1 (5.9)</td><td>24.9 (5.5)</td></tr><tr><th>Second-hand smoke in trimester 1 ( n ; %)</th><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Yes</th><td>18 (3.5)</td><td>34 (4.3)</td></tr><tr><th>No I don &#x27; t know</th><td>492 (96.5)</td><td>749 (95.7)</td></tr><tr><th>Prenatal alcohol intake ( n ; %) Yes</th><td>86 (17.6)</td><td>137 (18.2)</td></tr><tr><th>No</th><td>402 (82.4)</td><td>614 (81.8)</td></tr><tr><th>Maternal CES-D scale score (mean; SD)</th><td>5.6 (4.2)</td><td>5.6 (4.2)</td></tr><tr><th>Months exclusive breastfeeding</th><td>5.0 (3.3)</td><td>5.0 (3.3)</td></tr><tr><th>Gestational age (weeks; mean;</th><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>(mean; SD)</th><td>11.7 (1.4)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>SD) c</th><td></td><td>11.6 (1.5)</td></tr><tr><th>Maternal urinary glyphosate ( μ g/</th><td>0.31 (0.33)</td><td>0.27 (0.33)</td></tr><tr><th>L; median; IQR)</th><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Maternal urinary AMPA ( μ g/L;</th><td>0.25 (0.25)</td><td>0.24 (0.25)</td></tr><tr><th>median; IQR)</th><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Maternal urinary glyphosate + d</th><td>0.71 (0.74)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>AMPA ( μ g/L; median; IQR) Maternal daily FA intake from</th><td></td><td>0.69 (0.69)</td></tr><tr><th>supplements ( n ; %) μ</th><td>25 (4.9)</td><td>39 (5.0)</td></tr><tr><th>&lt; 400 g/day 400 - 1000 μ g/day</th><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>364 (71.4)</td><td>548 (70.0)</td></tr><tr><th>&gt; 1000 μ g/day</th><td>121 (23.7)</td><td>196 (25.0)</td></tr><tr><th>%) &lt; 64.89 nmol/L</th><td>51 (10.4)</td><td>75 (10.0)</td></tr><tr><th>64.89 - 124.89 nmol/L</th><td>341 (69.3)</td><td>522 (69.1)</td></tr><tr><th>&gt; 124.89 nmol/L</th><td>100 (20.3)</td><td>158 (20.9)</td></tr><tr><th>(mean; SD) Full Scale IQ</th><td>107.0 (13.6)</td><td>107.1 (13.5)</td></tr><tr><th>Verbal IQ</th><td>109.5 (13.4)</td><td>109.7 (13.3)</td></tr><tr><th>IQ</th><td>103.2 (14.9)</td><td>102.9 (15.0)</td></tr><tr><th>Performance</th><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Child social functioning (mean; SD)</th><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>SRS-2 Total T-score</th><td>45.4 (6.2)</td><td>45.3 (6.2)</td></tr><tr><th>T-score</th><td>49.7 (7.9)</td><td>49.3 (8.0)</td></tr><tr><th>Internalizing composite T-score</th><td>51.9 (8.3)</td><td>51.9 (8.6)</td></tr><tr><th>Externalizing composite Child sex ( n ; %)</th><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Male</th><td>246 (48.2)</td><td>383 (48.9) 400 (51.1)</td></tr><tr><th>Female</th><td>264 (51.8)</td><td></td></tr><tr><th>HOME score (mean; SD)</th><td>47.4 (4.3)</td><td>47.5 (4.3)</td></tr></tbody></table>Due to missing data, percentage totals for subgroups may not sum to the total sample  population;  percentages  are  reported  based  on  total  sample  in  each subgroup with available data.

Abbreviations : SD = standard deviation; CES-D = Centre for Epidemiological Studies -Depression  scale;  AMPA = Aminomethylphosphonic  acid;  IQR = interquartile range; FA = folic.

Acid; IQ = Intelligence Quotient; SRS = Social Responsiveness Scale; HOME = Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment.

Means represent geometric means.

- a Mother-child dyads with urinary glyphosate and/or AMPA concentration data, child Full-Scale IQ data, and primary covariate data.
- b Mother-child dyads with urinary glyphosate and/or AMPA concentration data, child externalizing behaviour (BASC) data, and primary covariate data.
- c Gestational age at time of maternal urine collection in trimester one.
- d Only for participants with both glyphosate and AMPA concentration data (n = 1796).

Fig.  2. Association  between  first  trimester  maternal  urinary  AMPA  concentrations (log2) and child PIQ. Note. The depicted association was adjusted for primary covariates (n = 505). The shaded area represents the 95 % CI. AMPA = Aminomethylphosphonic acid; PIQ = Performance IQ.

<!-- image -->

male and female children differed significantly, the effect of maternal urinary glyphosate on child VIQ was not statistically significant among males (B = -0.69, 95 % CI: 1.61, 0.24) or females (B = 0.61, 95 % CI: 0.31, 1.53) (Table 3). No evidence of effect modification by child sex was observed in the associations of maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations with child FSIQ, PIQ, SRS-2 Total T-scores, and Internalizing and Externalizing Problems composite T-scores.

3.4 Effect Modification by Maternal Plasma Total Folate or FA Intake from Supplements Overall, we found no evidence of effect modification by maternal plasma total folate ( Supplemental Table 2 ) or daily FA intake from supplements ( Supplemental Table 3 ) in the associations of maternal  urinary  glyphosate  and  AMPA  concentrations  with  child cognitive, social, or behavioral functioning.

## 3.4. Sensitivity analysis

When maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations were combined to form a composite (glyphosate + AMPA), we did not observe any statistically significant associations with children ' s cognitive (FSIQ, VIQ and PIQ), social (SRS-2 Total T-scores), or behavioural (Internalizing  and  Externalizing  Problems  composite  T-scores)  functioning ( Supplemental  Table  4 ).  Results  did  not  differ  substantially  when models were adjusted for secondary covariates. There was no evidence of effect modification by child sex ( Supplemental Table 5 ) or prenatal FA  supplementation  ( Supplemental  Tables  2  and  3 )  in  any  of  the models.

## 4. Discussion

This Canadian pregnancy cohort study is the largest to date investigating the association of prenatal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations with child neurodevelopment. It is also the first to examine

M. Hall et al.

Table 2 Linear associations between maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations, and child neurodevelopmental outcomes.

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 2 Linear associations between maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations, and child neurodevelopmental outcomes.</div></caption><tbody><tr><td></td><th colspan="4">Primary a</th><th colspan="4">Secondary b</th></tr><tr><td></td><th>n</th><th>B</th><th>95 % CI</th><th>p</th><th>n</th><th>B</th><th>95 % CI</th><th>p</th></tr><tr><th>Cognitive outcomes FSIQ</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate</th><td>501</td><td>0.36</td><td>1.03,0.31</td><td>0.29</td><td>457</td><td>0.39</td><td>1.10,0.31</td><td>0.28</td></tr><tr><th>AMPA</th><td>510</td><td>0.64</td><td>1.39,0.12</td><td>0.10</td><td>467</td><td>0.70</td><td>1.48,0.08</td><td>0.08</td></tr><tr><th>VIQ</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate</th><td>499</td><td>0.03</td><td>0.70,0.63</td><td>0.92</td><td>455</td><td>0.19</td><td>0.89,0.52</td><td>0.60</td></tr><tr><th>AMPA</th><td>507</td><td>0.23</td><td>0.98,0.54</td><td>0.56</td><td>464</td><td>0.39</td><td>1.19,0.40</td><td>0.33</td></tr><tr><th>PIQ</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate</th><td>496</td><td>0.62</td><td>1.38,0.15</td><td>0.11</td><td>453</td><td>0.47</td><td>1.26,0.32</td><td>0.24</td></tr><tr><th>AMPA</th><td>505</td><td>0.85</td><td>1.71,0.01</td><td>0.05</td><td>463</td><td>0.78</td><td>1.64,0.09</td><td>0.08</td></tr><tr><th>Social outcomes SRS-Total</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate</th><td>495</td><td>0.14</td><td>0.18,0.47</td><td>0.40</td><td>454</td><td>0.16</td><td>0.18,0.50</td><td>0.37</td></tr><tr><th>AMPA</th><td>504</td><td>0.27</td><td>0.08,0.61</td><td>0.13</td><td>464</td><td>0.32</td><td>0.04,0.68</td><td>0.08</td></tr><tr><th>Behavioural outcomes BASC-Internalizing</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate</th><td>762</td><td>0.17</td><td>0.54,0.19</td><td>0.35</td><td>455</td><td>0.04</td><td>0.51,0.44</td><td>0.88</td></tr><tr><th>AMPA</th><td>776</td><td>0.22</td><td>0.63,0.20</td><td>0.30</td><td>465</td><td>0.35</td><td>0.86,0.16</td><td>0.18</td></tr><tr><th>BASC-Externalizing</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate</th><td>769</td><td>0.06</td><td>0.39,0.27</td><td>0.72</td><td>457</td><td>0.03</td><td>0.48,0.42</td><td>0.89</td></tr><tr><th>AMPA</th><td>783</td><td>0.28</td><td>0.67,0.10</td><td>0.15</td><td>467</td><td>0.38</td><td>0.88,0.11</td><td>0.13</td></tr></tbody></table>AMPA = Aminomethylphosphonic acid; FSIQ = Full-Scale IQ; VIQ = Verbal IQ; PIQ = Performance IQ; SRS-Total = Social Responsiveness Scale Total T score; BASCInternalizing = Behavioral Assessment System for Children Internalizing composite T score; BASC-Externalizing = Behavioral Assessment System for Children Externalizing composite T score.

a Multiple linear regression models of associations between maternal urinary glyphosate (log) and AMPA (log) concentrations, and child cognitive, social, and behavioural functioning, adjusted for primary covariates (maternal age, race, pre-pregnancy BMI, parity, level of education, and child sex). Quality of the home environment was considered a primary covariate for models examining cognitive and social outcomes.

b Multiple linear regression models of associations between maternal urinary glyphosate (log) and AMPA (log) concentrations, and child cognitive, social, and behavioural functioning, adjusted for secondary covariates (primary covariates + maternal alcohol intake, second-hand smoke exposure, depression, breastfeeding status, and study site). Quality of the home environment was considered a secondary covariate for models examining behavioural outcomes.

Table 3 Sex specific effects in the associations between maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations, and child neurodevelopmental outcomes.

<table><caption><div class="caption">Table 3 Sex specific effects in the associations between maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations, and child neurodevelopmental outcomes.</div></caption><tbody><tr><td></td><th colspan="4">Females a</th><th colspan="4">Males b</th><th>Interaction term</th></tr><tr><td></td><th>n</th><th>B</th><th>95 % CI</th><th>p</th><th>n</th><td></td><th>95 % CI</th><th>p</th><th>p</th></tr><tr><th>Cognitive outcomes FSIQ</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate</th><td>501</td><td>0.07</td><td>1.02,0.88</td><td>0.88</td><td>501</td><td>0.66</td><td>1.61,0.29</td><td>0.18</td><td>0.39</td></tr><tr><th>AMPA</th><td>510</td><td>0.56</td><td>1.58,0.46</td><td>0.28</td><td>510</td><td>0.74</td><td>1.88,0.40</td><td>0.20</td><td>0.82</td></tr><tr><th>VIQ</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate</th><td>499</td><td>0.61</td><td>0.31,1.53</td><td>0.19</td><td>499</td><td>0.69</td><td>1.61,0.24</td><td>0.15</td><td>0.05</td></tr><tr><th>AMPA</th><td>507</td><td>0.10</td><td>0.95,1.14</td><td>0.85</td><td>507</td><td>0.64</td><td>1.74,0.47</td><td>0.26</td><td>0.33</td></tr><tr><th>PIQ</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate</th><td>496</td><td>0.84</td><td>1.93,0.26</td><td>0.13</td><td>496</td><td>0.39</td><td>1.49,0.72</td><td>0.49</td><td>0.58</td></tr><tr><th>AMPA</th><td>505</td><td>1.14</td><td>2.30,0.03</td><td>0.06</td><td>505</td><td>0.49</td><td>1.81,0.84</td><td>0.47</td><td>0.48</td></tr><tr><th>Social outcomes SRS-Total</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate</th><td>495</td><td>0.01</td><td>0.45,0.44</td><td>0.98</td><td>495</td><td>0.29</td><td>0.16,0.75</td><td>0.21</td><td>0.35</td></tr><tr><th>AMPA</th><td>504</td><td>0.09</td><td>0.38,0.55</td><td>0.71</td><td>504</td><td>0.49</td><td>0.03,1.01</td><td>0.06</td><td>0.26</td></tr><tr><th>Behavioural outcomes BASC-Internalizing</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate</th><td>762</td><td>0.07</td><td>0.58,0.44</td><td>0.78</td><td>762</td><td>0.28</td><td>0.80,0.25</td><td>0.30</td><td>0.59</td></tr><tr><th>AMPA</th><td>776</td><td>0.25</td><td>0.80,0.31</td><td>0.38</td><td>776</td><td>0.18</td><td>0.79,0.43</td><td>0.57</td><td>0.87</td></tr><tr><th>BASC-Externalizing</th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><th>Glyphosate</th><td>769</td><td>0.07</td><td>0.41,0.54</td><td>0.78</td><td>769</td><td>0.19</td><td>0.67,0.29</td><td>0.44</td><td>0.46</td></tr><tr><th>AMPA</th><td>783</td><td>0.18</td><td>0.70,0.35</td><td>0.51</td><td>783</td><td>0.41</td><td>0.96,0.15</td><td>0.15</td><td>0.55</td></tr></tbody></table>AMPA = Aminomethylphosphonic acid; FSIQ = Full-Scale IQ; VIQ = Verbal IQ; PIQ = Performance IQ; SRS-Total = Social Responsiveness Scale Total T score; BASCInternalizing = Behavioral Assessment System for Children Internalizing composite T score; BASC-Externalizing = Behavioral Assessment System for Children Externalizing composite T score.

a Multiple linear regression models of associations between maternal urinary glyphosate (log) and AMPA (log) concentrations, and child cognitive, social, and behavioural functioning, for participants with female children (n = 258 -400 depending on model) (adjusted for primary covariates).

b Multiple linear regression models of associations between maternal urinary glyphosate (log) and AMPA (log) concentrations, and child cognitive, social, and behavioural functioning, for participants with male children (n = 237 -383 depending on model) (adjusted for primary covariates).

potential effect modification by child sex and prenatal folic acid supplementation. Overall, prenatal glyphosate and AMPA concentrations were not significantly associated with children ' s  cognitive,  social,  or behavioural functioning at 3-to-4 years of age. We also did not observe any evidence of sex-specific effects or differences by maternal plasma total folate or folic acid intake from supplements. While few

M. Hall et al.

epidemiologic studies have evaluated the developmental neurotoxicity of glyphosate, some evidence suggests that it may impact the developing brain. A recent birth cohort study from Puerto Rico reported significant inverse associations between maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations  and  children ' s  cognitive,  social,  communication,  and adaptive skills at 12 and 24 months of age (assessed via the Battelle Developmental Inventory, 2nd Edition) (Jenkins et al., 2024). In this study, effects were strongest for maternal urinary AMPA concentrations and  child  communication  skills  at  12  (%change  per  IQR  increase  in urinary AMPA = -5.32; 95 % CI: 9.04,1.61) and 24 months (%change = -7.00; 95 % CI: 11.75,2.26) (Jenkins et al., 2024). Similar results were reported in a U.S. case-control study, where children were found to be at an increased risk of ASD (OR = 1.16; 95 % CI: 1.06,1.27) if their mothers lived  in  regions  where  ambient  exposure  to  glyphosate  was possible during pregnancy; the effect was stronger among those who had ASD and an intellectual disability (OR = 1.33; 95 % CI: 1.05,1.69) (Von Ehrenstein et al., 2019).

Discrepancies in findings between our study and others may be due to differences in timing of urine collection (first trimester vs throughout pregnancy), exposure estimation (biomarkers vs geographic based estimates), and levels of prenatal glyphosate and AMPA exposure, as well as divergence in outcome (i.e., child neurodevelopment) assessment. Median urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations were 0.31 and 0.25 μ g/L  in  our  study,  which  are  relatively  low  compared  with  those observed in the Puerto Rican study (Jenkins et al., 2024) (i.e., 0.63 and 0.45 μ g/L, respectively). Importantly, the study region in Puerto Rico was noted to be largely rural and at greater risk of exposure via drinking water contamination (Padilla et al., 2011) due to high application of glyphosate-based  herbicides  on  the  island  (Jenkins  et  al.,  2024).  In contrast,  mother -child  dyads  in  the  MIREC  cohort  primarily  live  in urban areas (Arbuckle et al., 2013), with lower proximity to agricultural and commercial sources of exposure (e.g., industrial  farmland,  agrochemical  manufacturers,  etc.).  Differences  in  exposure  levels  across study samples may also be attributable to variability in diet, as diet may be an important source of glyphosate exposure (Ashley-Martin et al., 2023; Fagan et al., 2020). As a relatively higher-resourced study population  (e.g.,  higher  mean  socioeconomic  status  and  quality  of  home environment), children in the MIREC cohort may also be less vulnerable to,  or  better  protected(Tong  et  al.,  2007)  from  the  potential  adverse effects of prenatal glyphosate and AMPA  exposure on neurodevelopment. Notably, maternal urinary glyphosate levels in the MIREC cohort are consistent with those observed in a nationally representative cohort in the U.S. [National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2015 -2016], where females 18 years of age and older had median urinary glyphosate concentrations of 0.29 μ g/L (Jenkins et al., 2024). Urinary glyphosate levels in NHANES (2015 -2016) were found to  be  significantly  lower  (Wilcoxon  rank  sum  test  p-value &lt; 0.001) (Jenkins et al., 2024) than those in the Puerto Rican cohort. Maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA levels in the MIREC cohort are also lower than those found in the general Canadian population (median concentrations  of  0.51  and  0.41 μ g/L,  respectively),  as  reported  in  the 2014 -2015 Canadian Health Measures Survey (Health Canada, 2023).

In previous studies, gestational glyphosate and AMPA exposure were associated with adverse birth outcomes. Specifically, higher maternal urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations in pregnancy have been associated with greater odds of preterm birth (Silver et al., 2021), lower birthweight (Gerona et al., 2022), shortened gestational length (Parvez et  al.,  2018),  and  increased  anogenital  distance  in  female  infants (Lesseur  et  al.,  2021).  First  trimester  urinary  glyphosate  and  AMPA concentrations were not associated with increased odds of preterm birth or  reduced  gestational  age  in  MIREC  (Ashley-Martin  et  al.,  2024); however, most associations in other studies were observed using urine samples collected later in pregnancy (i.e., second or third trimester). Importantly,  some  of  the  statistically  significant  associations(Lesseur et al., 2021; Silver et al., 2021) were observed at urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations similar to, or lower than those found in the MIREC

cohort (e.g., median glyphosate: 0.22 μ g/L; median AMPA: 0.14 μ g/L in a U.S. pregnancy cohort) (Lesseur et al., 2021). Considering the inconsistency  in  findings  across  studies,  it  is  unclear  whether  gestational glyphosate and AMPA exposure may pose a risk to fetal development at lower levels of exposure.

Glyphosate and AMPA may impact the developing brain by several possible mechanisms. As an herbicide, glyphosate works by inhibiting the plant enzyme 5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate synthase (Costas-Ferreira et al., 2022), which is involved in the synthesis of aromatic amino acids. As vertebrates do not have this enzyme, glyphosate was presumed to be safe for non-target organisms (Ojiro et al., 2023); however, emerging toxicological evidence suggests that glyphosate and AMPA may induce neurotoxicity via oxidative stress (neuroinflammation and cholinergic system dysfunction) (Cattani et al., 2017; Costas-Ferreira et al., 2022; Eaton et al., 2022; Gallegos et al., 2018; Makris et al., 2022; Ojiro et al., 2023; Turkmen et al., 2019), altered regulation of antioxidant genes (e.g., Sod2 and Cat ) (Ojiro et al., 2023), and structural and functional changes in the hippocampus, including impaired neuronal development (Ait Bali et al., 2017; Coullery et al., 2016; Ojiro et al., 2023), dysregulation of neuronal signaling pathways (Costas-Ferreira et al., 2022), and disturbances in synaptic organization and plasticity (Coullery et al., 2016; Luna et al., 2021; Ojiro et al., 2023). Because glyphosate and AMPA can cross the blood -brain-barrier, they may  also  induce  direct  neurotoxic  effects  by  infiltrating  the  brain (Winstone et  al.,  2022).  Given  our  findings,  we  cannot  comment  on whether any of these potential mechanisms may be at play in the current study.

Our finding that maternal glyphosate and AMPA exposure in pregnancy  was  not  associated  with  sex-specific  effects  on  child  neurodevelopment is consistent with one previous study examining prenatal glyphosate exposure and risk of ASD; whereby, odds ratios were found to be similar among both sexes (Von Ehrenstein et al., 2019). Other studies investigating associations of prenatal exposures to pesticides (ConejoBola ˜ nos et al.,  2024),  particularly  organophosphate (OP) insecticides (Gonz ´ alez-Alzaga et al., 2015; Ntantu Nkinsa et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2017), with children ' s cognitive, motor, language, and social-emotional development have reported evidence of sex-specific effects, with stronger inverse associations often observed among males. Considering this pattern of results and that our study is one of the first to examine sex differences in child neurodevelopment in relation to prenatal glyphosate and AMPA exposure, further investigation may be warranted.

In our study, maternal plasma total folate and daily FA intake from supplements  did  not  modify  the  associations  of  maternal  urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations with children ' s cognitive, social, or behavioural functioning. To our knowledge, this is the first study to consider the potential neuroprotective effects of maternal FA supplement intake in the context of glyphosate and AMPA exposure. Previous studies  examining  prenatal  exposures  to  other  pesticides  (e.g.,  OPs, chlorpyrifos,  pyrethroids)  have  reported  a  lower  risk  of  ASD  among children whose mothers had high FA intake early in pregnancy (Schmidt et  al.,  2017).  Higher  FA  supplement  intake  has  also  been  found  to mitigate the adverse effects of prenatal phthalate exposure on children ' s social abilities in the MIREC cohort (Oulhote et al., 2020) and protect against  cognitive  deficits  in  lead-exposed  children  in  the  Philippines (Solon et al., 2008). The lack of evidence supporting effect modification by maternal FA supplement intake in the current study may be attributable to the generally low levels of glyphosate and AMPA exposure and high FA supplementation rate indicated in the MIREC cohort (Arbuckle et al., 2013).

## 4.1. Strengths and limitations

Strengths of this study include the use of a large pregnancy cohort with individual biomarkers of maternal glyphosate and AMPA exposure, which were analyzed using gold-standard methods. We also adjusted for several  important  precision  covariates  in  our  statistical  analyses,

M. Hall et al.

including maternal alcohol intake, second-hand smoke exposure, and quality of the home environment. A potential limitation of this study is that  we  were  unable  to  account  for  other  chemical  components  of glyphosate-based herbicides (e.g., surfactants), which in combination, may be more toxic than glyphosate alone (Jenkins et al., 2024; Mesnage et al., 2013). Another limitation is that MIREC participants tend to be older, more educated, and more likely to be married or common law relative  to  the  general  Canadian  population  (Arbuckle  et  al.,  2013). MIREC participants are also primarily White, and 87 % report prenatal vitamin use during early pregnancy (Weiler et al., 2021), which likely exceeds  use  in  the  broader  Canadian  population  (Patti  et  al.,  2022; Public Health Agency of Canada, 2014). While use of a homogenous sample reduces the potential for confounding, it limits the generalizability to study populations with varying health and neurodevelopmental profiles, race and ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and rurality. As previously noted, glyphosate and AMPA concentrations in our primarily urban study population are lower than those reported in more rural and under-resourced study populations (Jenkins et al., 2024). (Other  identified  epidemiological  studies  of  glyphosate  and  neurodevelopment relied on estimates of ambient and self-reported pesticide use  rather  than  biomonitoring  data  (Juntarawijit  et  al.,  2020;  Von Ehrenstein  et  al.,  2019);  these  approaches  are  subject  to  exposure misclassification and preclude meaningful comparisons with individual level  biomonitoring  data).  Given  the  relatively  healthy  profile  and moderate to high socioeconomic status of MIREC participants, they may, on average, be less susceptible to the potential adverse effects of neurotoxicants compared to other populations, such as those in the PROTECT study (Tong et al., 2007). Therefore, we acknowledge the need for future research in populations that may experience increased exposure and heightened susceptibility to neurotoxicants. We also did not have data on maternal IQ, which has been associated with children ' s cognitive development (Kirkpatrick et al., 2014; Lean et al., 2018); maternal education served as a proxy for this instead. In our study, we derived a composite  variable  (i.e.,  glyphosate + AMPA) to  estimate  combined exposure to both glyphosate and AMPA. Importantly, however, glyphosate and AMPA have different half-lives, pharmacokinetics, and sources of exposure, which may limit the propriety of combining them to form  a  composite  (Eskenazi  et  al.,  2023;  Health  Canada,  1987). Furthermore,  both  glyphosate  and  AMPA  were  measured  in  a  first trimester spot urine sample instead of serial spot urine or 24-hour urine samples. Given this and the relatively short half-life of glyphosate and AMPA in the body (between 3.5 and 14.5 h) (Connolly et al., 2019), these spots samples may not accurately reflect maternal glyphosate and AMPA exposure levels. This is because biomarkers of compounds with shorter half-lives are known to have higher within-individual variability (Perrier et al., 2016), which is likely even greater for chemicals where diet  is  a  primary  source  of  exposure  (e.g.,  glyphosate  and  AMPA). Because urinary glyphosate and AMPA concentrations were generally low in the current study, 52 % and 61 % of samples fell below the LOQ; however, it is likely that the rank order of these values was maintained and did not impede our ability to assess population level associations (Soukup et al., 2020).

## 4.2. Conclusion

In this primarily urban cohort of Canadian mother -child pairs, prenatal  glyphosate  and  AMPA  concentrations  were  not  significantly associated with child cognitive, social, or behavioral functioning at 3-to4 years of age. Further evaluation of glyphosate as a potential developmental  neurotoxicant  in  a  study  with  multiple  urine  samples  per participant and at higher exposure levels (i.e., including those living in agricultural  communities)  is  warranted.  Future  studies  may  also consider evaluating a broader array of neurodevelopmental outcomes (e.g., motor function).

## 5. Funding Sources

This work was supported by the National Institute of Environmental Health Science (NIEHS) [grant number R01ES030365, 2020 -2025], and the Maternal-Infant Research on Environmental Chemicals Study was funded  by  the  Chemicals  Management  Plan  at  Health  Canada,  the Ontario Ministry  of  the  Environment,  and  the  Canadian  Institute  for Health Research (CIHR) [grant number MOP-81285, 2006]. This work was also supported by a CIHR scholarship awarded to Meaghan Hall. None of the funding sources had direct involvement in the conduct of the study and preparation of the manuscript.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

Meaghan Hall: Writing -original  draft,  Formal  analysis. Jillian Ashley-Martin: Writing -review &amp; editing,  Supervision,  Project administration, Methodology. Christine Till: Writing -review &amp; editing, Supervision, Project administration. Janice Hu: Writing -review &amp; editing, Formal analysis. Bruce Lanphear: Writing -review &amp; editing, Supervision, Conceptualization. Cynthia Curl: Writing -original draft, Supervision,  Conceptualization. Tye  E.  Arbuckle: Writing -original draft, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Michel Boivin: Writing -review &amp; editing,  Project  administration,  Conceptualization. Linda Booij: Writing -review &amp; editing, Project administration. Gina Muckle: Writing -review &amp; editing, Project administration, Conceptualization. Mandy  Fisher: Writing -review &amp; editing,  Project  administration, Funding acquisition. Elizabeth Asztalos: Writing -review &amp; editing, Project administration. Maryse F. Bouchard: Writing -review &amp; editing. Amanda  J.  MacFarlane: Writing -review &amp; editing,  Project administration, Methodology. Carly Hyland: Writing -review &amp; editing, Supervision, Conceptualization.

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgments

The  authors  would  like  to  extend  a  sincere  thank  you  to  Nicole Lupien and Sarah Garrett (Centre de Recherche, CHU Sainte-Justine), and the Maternal Infant Research on Environmental Chemicals (MIREC) Study coordinating staff for their administrative support; the MIREC  site  investigators,  as  well  as  the  MIREC  Biobank;  and  Tyler Pollock, Kim Irwin, and Haris Gisavi from Health Canada for their review of our manuscript.

## Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.envint.2025.109480.

## Data availability

The data that has been used is confidential.

## References

- Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), 2020. Toxicological Profile for Glyphosate. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Atlanta, GA.
- Ait Bali, Y., Ba-Mhamed, S., Bennis, M., 2017. Behavioral and immunohistochemical study of the effects of subchronic and chronic exposure to glyphosate in mice. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 11, 146. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00146.
- Arbuckle, T.E., Fraser, W.D., Fisher, M., Davis, K., Liang, C.L., Lupien, N., Bastien, S., Velez, M.P., von Dadelszen, P., Hemmings, D.G., Wang, J., Helewa, M., Taback, S., Sermer, M., Foster, W., Ross, G., Fredette, P., Smith, G., Walker, M., Shear, R.,

M. Hall et al.

- Dodds, L., Ettinger, A.S., Weber, J.-P., D ' Amour, M., Legrand, M., Kumarathasan, P., Vincent, R., Luo, Z.-C., Platt, R.W., Mitchell, G., Hidiroglou, N., Cockell, K., Villeneuve, M., Rawn, D.F.K., Dabeka, R., Cao, X.-L., Becalski, A., Ratnayake, N., Bondy, G., Jin, X., Wang, Z., Tittlemier, S., Julien, P., Avard, D., Weiler, H., Leblanc, A., Muckle, G., Boivin, M., Dionne, G., Ayotte, P., Lanphear, B., S ´ eguin, J.R., Saint-Amour, D., Dewailly, E., Monnier, P., Koren, G., Ouellet, E., 2013. Cohort profile: the maternal-infant research on environmental chemicals research platform. Paediatr. Perinat. Epidemiol. 27, 415 -425. https://doi.org/10.1111/ppe.12061.
- Ashley-Martin, J., Huang, R., MacPherson, S., Brion, O., Owen, J., Gaudreau, E., Bienvenu, J.-F., Fisher, M., Borghese, M.M., Bouchard, M.F., Lanphear, B., Foster, W. G., Arbuckle, T.E., 2023. Urinary concentrations and determinants of glyphosate and glufosinate in pregnant Canadian participants in the MIREC study. Environ. Res. 217, 114842. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2022.114842.
- Ashley-Martin, J., Marro, L., Owen, J., Borghese, M.M., Arbuckle, T., Bouchard, M.F., Lanphear, B., Walker, M., Foster, W., Fisher, M., 2024. Gestational urinary concentrations of glyphosate and aminomethylphosphonic acid in relation to preterm birth: the MIREC study. J. Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. https://doi.org/ 10.1038/s41370-024-00702-w.
- Barbosa, E.R., Leiros Da Costa, M.D., Bacheschi, L.A., Scaff, M., Leite, C.C., 2001. Parkinsonism after glycine-derivate exposure. Mov. Disord. 16, 565 -568. https:// doi.org/10.1002/mds.1105.
- Beard, J.D., Umbach, D.M., Hoppin, J.A., Richards, M., Alavanja, M.C.R., Blair, A., Sandler, D.P., Kamel, F., 2014. Pesticide exposure and depression among male private pesticide applicators in the agricultural health study. Environ. Health Perspect. 122, 984 -991. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1307450.
- Benbrook, C.M., 2016. Trends in glyphosate herbicide use in the United States and globally. Environ. Sci. Eur. 28, 3. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12302-016-0070-0.
- Bienvenu, J.-F., B ´ elanger, P., Gaudreau, ´ E., Provencher, G., Fleury, N., 2021. Determination of glyphosate, glufosinate and their major metabolites in urine by the UPLC-MS/MS method applicable to biomonitoring and epidemiological studies. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 413, 2225 -2234. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-021-03194x.
- B ø hn, T., Cuhra, M., Traavik, T., Sanden, M., Fagan, J., Primicerio, R., 2014. Compositional differences in soybeans on the market: glyphosate accumulates in Roundup Ready GM soybeans. Food Chem. 153, 207 -215. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.foodchem.2013.12.054.
- Cattani, D., Cesconetto, P.A., Tavares, M.K., Parisotto, E.B., De Oliveira, P.A., Rieg, C.E. H., Leite, M.C., Prediger, R.D.S., Wendt, N.C., Razzera, G., Filho, D.W., Zamoner, A., 2017. Developmental exposure to glyphosate-based herbicide and depressive-like behavior in adult offspring: Implication of glutamate excitotoxicity and oxidative stress. Toxicology 387, 67 -80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2017.06.001.
- Chronister, B.N.C., Yang, K., Yang, A.R., Lin, T., Tu, X.M., Lopez-Paredes, D., Checkoway, H., Suarez-Torres, J., Gahagan, S., Martinez, D., Barr, D., Moore, R.C., Suarez-Lopez, J.R., 2023. Urinary glyphosate, 2,4-D and DEET biomarkers in relation to neurobehavioral performance in ecuadorian adolescents in the ESPINA cohort. Environ. Health Perspect. 131, 107007. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP11383.
- Conejo-Bola ˜ nos, L.D., Mora, A.M., Hern ´ andez-Bonilla, D., Cano, J.C., Menezes-Filho, J. A., Eskenazi, B., Lindh, C.H., Joode, V.W.D., B.,, 2024. Prenatal current-use pesticide exposure and children ' s neurodevelopment at one year of age in the Infants ' Environmental Health (ISA) birth cohort. Costa Rica. Environ. Res. 249, 118222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2024.118222.
- Connolly, A., Jones, K., Basinas, I., Galea, K.S., Kenny, L., McGowan, P., Coggins, M.A., 2019. Exploring the half-life of glyphosate in human urine samples. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 222, 205 -210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2018.09.004.
- Costas-Ferreira, C., Dur ´ an, R., Faro, L.R.F., 2022. Toxic effects of glyphosate on the nervous system: a systematic review. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, 4605. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/ijms23094605.
- Coullery, R.P., Ferrari, M.E., Rosso, S.B., 2016. Neuronal development and axon growth are altered by glyphosate through a WNT non-canonical signaling pathway. Neurotoxicology 52, 150 -161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2015.12.004.
- Curl, C.L., Hyland, C., Spivak, M., Sheppard, L., Lanphear, B., Antoniou, M.N., Ospina, M., Calafat, A.M., 2023. The effect of pesticide spray season and residential proximity to agriculture on glyphosate exposure among pregnant people in Southern Idaho, 2021. Environ. Health Perspect. 131, 127001. https://doi.org/10.1289/ EHP12768.
- De Araujo, J.S.A., Delgado, I.F., Paumgartten, F.J.R., 2016. Glyphosate and adverse pregnancy outcomes, a systematic review of observational studies. BMC Public Health 16, 472. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-016-3153-3.
- Duke, S.O., 2005. Taking stock of herbicide-resistant crops ten years after introduction. Pest Manag. Sci. 61, 211 -218. https://doi.org/10.1002/ps.1024.
- Duty, S.M., Ackerman, R.M., Calafat, A.M., Hauser, R., 2005. Personal care product use predicts urinary concentrations of some phthalate monoesters. Environ. Health Perspect. 113, 1530 -1535. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.8083.
- Eaton, J.L., Cathey, A.L., Fernandez, J.A., Watkins, D.J., Silver, M.K., Milne, G.L., VelezVega, C., Rosario, Z., Cordero, J., Alshawabkeh, A., Meeker, J.D., 2022. The association between urinary glyphosate and aminomethyl phosphonic acid with biomarkers of oxidative stress among pregnant women in the PROTECT birth cohort study. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 233, 113300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. ecoenv.2022.113300.
- Eriksson, M., Hardell, L., Carlberg, M., Å kerman, M., 2008. Pesticide exposure as risk factor for non-Hodgkin lymphoma including histopathological subgroup analysis. Int. J. Cancer 123, 1657 -1663. https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.23589.
- Eskenazi, B., Gunier, R.B., Rauch, S., Kogut, K., Perito, E.R., Mendez, X., Limbach, C., Holland, N., Bradman, A., Harley, K.G., Mills, P.J., Mora, A.M., 2023. Association of Lifetime Exposure to Glyphosate and Aminomethylphosphonic Acid (AMPA) with Liver Inflammation and Metabolic Syndrome at Young Adulthood: findings from the
- CHAMACOS Study. Environ. Health Perspect. 131, 37001. https://doi.org/10.1289/ EHP11721.
- Fagan, J., Bohlen, L., Patton, S., Klein, K., 2020. Organic diet intervention significantly reduces urinary glyphosate levels in U.S. children and adults. Environ. Res. 189, 109898. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.109898.
- FAO and WHO, 2019. Pesticide residues in food 2019 - Report 2019 - Extra Joint FAO/ WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues. Rome.
- Fisher, M., Muckle, G., Lanphear, B., Arbuckle, T.E., Braun, J.M., Zidek, A., V ´ elez, M.P., Lupien, N., Bastien, S., Ashley-Martin, J., Oulhote, Y., Borghese, M.M., Walker, M., Asztalos, E., Bouchard, M.F., Booij, L., Palmert, M.R., Morrison, K.M., Cummings, E. A., Khatchadourian, K., Panagiotopoulos, C., Glendon, G., Shutt, R., Abdul-Fatah, A., Seal, K., Fraser, W.D., 2023. Cohort profile update: the nal-Infant Research on Environmental Chemicals Child Development study (MIREC-CD PLUS). Paediatr. Perinat. Epidemiol. 37, 719 -732. https://doi.org/10.1111/ppe.13013.
- Franke, A.A., Li, X., Lai, J.F., 2020. Analysis of glyphosate, aminomethylphosphonic acid, and glufosinate from human urine by HRAM LC-MS. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 412, 8313 -8324. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-020-02966-1.
- Gallegos, C.E., Baier, C.J., Bartos, M., Bras, C., Domínguez, S., M ´ onaco, N., Gumilar, F., Gim ´ enez, M.S., Minetti, A., 2018. Perinatal glyphosate-based herbicide exposure in rats alters brain antioxidant status, glutamate and acetylcholine metabolism and affects recognition memory. Neurotox. Res. 34, 363 -374. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s12640-018-9894-2.
- Gerona, R.R., Reiter, J.L., Zakharevich, I., Proctor, C., Ying, J., Mesnage, R., Antoniou, M., Winchester, P.D., 2022. Glyphosate exposure in early pregnancy and reduced fetal growth: a prospective observational study of high-risk pregnancies. Environ. Health 21, 95. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-022-00906-3.
- Gonz ´ alez-Alzaga, B., Hern ´ andez, A.F., Rodríguez-Barranco, M., G ´ omez, I., AguilarGardu ˜ no, C., L ´ opez-Flores, I., Parr ´ on, T., Lacasa ˜ na, M., 2015. Pre- and postnatal exposures to pesticides and neurodevelopmental effects in children living in agricultural communities from South-Eastern Spain. Environ. Int. 85, 229 -237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2015.09.019.
- Government of Canada, 2020. Glyphosate in Canada. https://www.canada.ca/en/healthcanada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/pesticides-pestmanagement/fact-sheets-other-resources/glyphosate.html.
- Grau, D., Grau, N., Gascuel, Q., Paroissin, C., Stratonovitch, C., Lairon, D., Devault, D.A., Di Cristofaro, J., 2022. Quantifiable urine glyphosate levels detected in 99% of the French population, with higher values in men, in younger people, and in farmers. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 29, 32882 -32893. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356021-18110-0.
- Health Canada, 2023. Canadian Biomonitoring Dashboard. Ottawa, Ontario. https:// health-infobase.canada.ca/biomonitoring/.
- Health Canada, 1987. Guidelines for Canadian Drinking Water Quality: Guideline Technical Document -Glyphosate (Guidelines).
- Hsiao, C.C., Yang, A.-M., Wang, C., Lin, C.-Y., 2023. Association between glyphosate exposure and cognitive function, depression, and neurological diseases in a representative sample of US adults: NHANES 2013 -2014 analysis. Environ. Res., 116860 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2023.116860.
- Hyland, C., Bradshaw, P.T., Gunier, R.B., Mora, A.M., Kogut, K., Deardorff, J., Sagiv, S.K., Bradman, A., Eskenazi, B., 2021. Associations between pesticide mixtures applied near home during pregnancy and early childhood with adolescent behavioral and emotional problems in the CHAMACOS study. Environ. Epidemiol. 5, e150.
- Hyland, C., Spivak, M., Sheppard, L., Lanphear, B.P., Antoniou, M., Ospina, M., Calafat, A.M., Curl, C.L., 2023. Urinary glyphosate concentrations among pregnant participants in a randomized, crossover trial of organic and conventional diets. Environ. Health Perspect. 131, 77005. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP12155.
- Islam, M.M., Khan, M.N., 2023. Early childhood development and its association with maternal parity. Child Care Health Dev. 49, 80 -89. https://doi.org/10.1111/ cch.13011.
- Jayasumana, C., Gunatilake, S., Senanayake, P., 2014. Glyphosate, hard water and nephrotoxic metals: are they the culprits behind the epidemic of chronic kidney disease of unknown etiology in Sri Lanka? Int. J. Environ. Res. Public. Health 11, 2125 -2147. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph110202125.
- Jayasumana, C., Paranagama, P., Agampodi, S., Wijewardane, C., Gunatilake, S., Siribaddana, S., 2015. Drinking well water and occupational exposure to Herbicides is associated with chronic kidney disease, in Padavi-Sripura. Sri Lanka. Environ. Health 14, 6. https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-14-6.
- Jenkins, H.M., Meeker, J.D., Zimmerman, E., Cathey, A., Fernandez, J., Monta ˜ nez, G.H., Park, S., Pab ´ on, Z.R., V ´ elez Vega, C.M., Cordero, J.F., Alshawabkeh, A., Watkins, D. J., 2024. Gestational glyphosate exposure and early childhood neurodevelopment in a Puerto Rico birth cohort. Environ. Res. 246, 118114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. envres.2024.118114.
- Juntarawijit, Y., Chaichanawirote, U., Rakmeesri, P., Chairattanasakda, P., Pumyim, V., Juntarawijit, C., 2020. Chlorpyrifos and other pesticide exposure and suspected developmental delay in children aged under 5 years: a case-control study in Phitsanulok, Thailand. F1000Research 9, 1501. Doi:10.12688/ f1000research.27874.1.
- Kamel, F., Umbach, D.M., Bedlack, R.S., Richards, M., Watson, M., Alavanja, M.C.R., Blair, A., Hoppin, J.A., Schmidt, S., Sandler, D.P., 2012. Pesticide exposure and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurotoxicology 33, 457 -462. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.neuro.2012.04.001.
- Kirkpatrick, R.M., McGue, M., Iacono, W.G., Miller, M.B., Basu, S., 2014. Results of a ' GWAS plus: ' general cognitive ability is substantially heritable and massively polygenic. PLoS One 9, e112390. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0112390.
- Lean, R.E., Paul, R.A., Smyser, C.D., Rogers, C.E., 2018. Maternal intelligence quotient (IQ) predicts IQ and language in very preterm children at age 5 years. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 59, 150 -159. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12810.

M. Hall et al.

- Lesseur, C., Pirrotte, P., Pathak, K.V., Manservisi, F., Mandrioli, D., Belpoggi, F., Panzacchi, S., Li, Q., Barrett, E.S., Nguyen, R.H.N., Sathyanarayana, S., Swan, S.H., Chen, J., 2021. Maternal urinary levels of glyphosate during pregnancy and anogenital distance in newborns in a US multicenter pregnancy cohort. Environ. Pollut. 280, 117002. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117002.
- Liu, J.-B., Chen, K., Li, Z.-F., Wang, Z.-Y., Wang, L., 2022. Glyphosate-induced gut microbiota dysbiosis facilitates male reproductive toxicity in rats. Sci. Total Environ. 805, 150368. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.150368.
- Lubin, J.H., Colt, J.S., Camann, D., Davis, S., Cerhan, J.R., Severson, R.K., Bernstein, L., Hartge, P., 2004. Epidemiologic evaluation of measurement data in the presence of detection limits. Environ. Health Perspect. 112, 1691 -1696. https://doi.org/ 10.1289/ehp.7199.
- Luna, S., Neila, L.P., Vena, R., Borgatello, C., Rosso, S.B., 2021. Glyphosate exposure induces synaptic impairment in hippocampal neurons and cognitive deficits in developing rats. Arch. Toxicol. 95, 2137 -2150. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204021-03046-8.
- Makris, K.C., Efthymiou, N., Konstantinou, C., Anastasi, E., Schoeters, G., KolossaGehring, M., Katsonouri, A., 2022. Oxidative stress of glyphosate, AMPA and metabolites of pyrethroids and chlorpyrifos pesticides among primary school children in Cyprus. Environ. Res. 212, 113316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. envres.2022.113316.
- Malhotra, R.C., Ghia, D.K., Cordato, D.J., Beran, R.G., 2010. Glyphosate -surfactant herbicide-induced reversible encephalopathy. J. Clin. Neurosci. 17, 1472 -1473. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2010.02.026.
- May, T., Adesina, I., McGillivray, J., Rinehart, N.J., 2019. Sex differences in neurodevelopmental disorders. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 32, 622 -626. https://doi.org/ 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000714.
- Mendez, M.J., Aimar, S.B., Aparicio, V.C., Ramirez Haberkon, N.B., Buschiazzo, D.E., De Ger ´ onimo, E., Costa, J.L., 2017. Glyphosate and Aminomethylphosphonic acid (AMPA) contents in the respirable dust emitted by an agricultural soil of the central semiarid region of Argentina. Aeolian Res. 29, 23 -29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. aeolia.2017.09.004.
- Mesnage, R., Bernay, B., S ´ eralini, G.-E., 2013. Ethoxylated adjuvants of glyphosate-based herbicides are active principles of human cell toxicity. Toxicology 313, 122 -128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2012.09.006.
- Milesi, M.M., Lorenz, V., Durando, M., Rossetti, M.F., Varayoud, J., 2021. Glyphosate herbicide: reproductive outcomes and multigenerational effects. Front. Endocrinol. 12, 672532. https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2021.672532.
- Moreno-Gim ´ enez, A., Campos-Berga, L., Nowak, A., Sahuquillo-Leal, R., D ' Ocon, A., Herv ´ as, D., Naval ´ on, P., Vento, M., García-Blanco, A., 2022. Impact of maternal age on infants ' emotional regulation and psychomotor development. Psychol. Med. 52, 3708 -3719. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291721000568.
- Mu ˜ noz-Quezada, M.T., Lucero, B.A., Barr, D.B., Steenland, K., Levy, K., Ryan, P.B., Iglesias, V., Alvarado, S., Concha, C., Rojas, E., Vega, C., 2013. Neurodevelopmental effects in children associated with exposure to organophosphate pesticides: a systematic review. Neurotoxicology 39, 158 -168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. neuro.2013.09.003.
- Ntantu Nkinsa, P., Muckle, G., Ayotte, P., Lanphear, B.P., Arbuckle, T.E., Fraser, W.D., Bouchard, M.F., 2020. Organophosphate pesticides exposure during fetal development and IQ scores in 3 and 4-year old Canadian children. Environ. Res. 190, 110023. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.110023.
- Ojiro, R., Okano, H., Takahashi, Y., Takashima, K., Tang, Q., Ozawa, S., Zou, X., Woo, G.H., Shibutani, M., 2023. Comparison of the effect of glyphosate and glyphosatebased herbicide on hippocampal neurogenesis after developmental exposure in rats. Toxicology 483, 153369. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2022.153369.
- Ospina, M., Schütze, A., Morales-Agudelo, P., Vidal, M., Wong, L.-Y., Calafat, A.M., 2022. Exposure to glyphosate in the United States: data from the 2013 -2014 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Environ. Int. 170, 107620. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.envint.2022.107620.
- Oulhote, Y., Lanphear, B., Braun, J.M., Webster, G.M., Arbuckle, T.E., Etzel, T., ForgetDubois, N., Seguin, J.R., Bouchard, M.F., MacFarlane, A., Ouellet, E., Fraser, W., Muckle, G., 2020. Gestational exposures to phthalates and folic acid, and autistic traits in Canadian children. Environ. Health Perspect. 128, 27004. https://doi.org/ 10.1289/EHP5621.
- Padilla, I., Irizarry, C., Steele, K., 2011. Historical contamination of groundwater resources in the north coast Karst Aquifers of Puerto Rico. Rev. Dimens. 3, 7 -12.
- Parvez, S., Gerona, R.R., Proctor, C., Friesen, M., Ashby, J.L., Reiter, J.L., Lui, Z., Winchester, P.D., 2018. Glyphosate exposure in pregnancy and shortened gestational length: a prospective Indiana birth cohort study. Environ. Health 17, 23. https://doi. org/10.1186/s12940-018-0367-0.
- Patti, M.A., Braun, J.M., Arbuckle, T.E., MacFarlane, A.J., 2022. Associations between folic acid supplement use and folate status biomarkers in the first and third trimesters of pregnancy in the Maternal-Infant Research on Environmental Chemicals (MIREC) Pregnancy Cohort Study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 116, 1852 -1863. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/nqac235.
- Peillex, C., Pelletier, M., 2020. The impact and toxicity of glyphosate and glyphosatebased herbicides on health and immunity. J. Immunotoxicol. 17, 163 -174. https:// doi.org/10.1080/1547691X.2020.1804492.
- Perrier, F., Giorgis-Allemand, L., Slama, R., Philippat, C., 2016. Within-subject pooling of biological samples to reduce exposure misclassification in biomarker-based studies. Epidemiology 27, 378 -388. https://doi.org/10.1097/EDE.0000000000000460.
- Pierce, J.S., Roberts, B., Kougias, D.G., Comerford, C.E., Riordan, A.S., Keeton, K.A., Reamer, H.A., Jacobs, N.F.B., Lotter, J.T., 2020. Pilot study evaluating inhalation and dermal glyphosate exposure resulting from simulated heavy residential consumer application of Roundup ® . Inhal. Toxicol. 32, 354 -367. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/08958378.2020.1814457.
- Public Health Agency of Canada, 2014. Folic acid use among pregnant women in Canada: Results from the Canadian Maternity Experiences Survey. https://www.canada.ca/ en/public-health/services/publications/healthy-living/folic-acid-use-amongpregnant-women-canada.html.
- RDocumentation, n.d. impute.boot: Bootstrapping Imputation for Many Chemicals. Rendon-von Osten, J., Dzul-Caamal, R., 2017. Glyphosate residues in groundwater, drinking water and urine of subsistence farmers from intensive agriculture localities: a survey in Hopelch ´ en, Campeche, Mexico. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public. Health 14, 595. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14060595.
- Rieg, C.E.H., Cattani, D., Naspolini, N.F., Cenci, V.H., de Liz Oliveira Cavalli, V.L., Jacques, A.V., Nascimento, M.V.P.D.S., Dalmarco, E.M., De Moraes, A.C.R., SantosSilva, M.C., Silva, F.R.M.B., Parisotto, E.B., Zamoner, A., 2022. Perinatal exposure to a glyphosate pesticide formulation induces offspring liver damage. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 454, 116245. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2022.116245.
- Sanchez, C.E., Barry, C., Sabhlok, A., Russell, K., Majors, A., Kollins, S.H., Fuemmeler, B. F., 2018. Maternal pre-pregnancy obesity and child neurodevelopmental outcomes: a meta-analysis. Obes. Rev. 19, 464 -484. https://doi.org/10.1111/obr.12643.
- Schmidt, R.J., Kogan, V., Shelton, J.F., Delwiche, L., Hansen, R.L., Ozonoff, S., Ma, C.C., McCanlies, E.C., Bennett, D.H., Hertz-Picciotto, I., Tancredi, D.J., Volk, H.E., 2017. Combined prenatal pesticide exposure and folic acid intake in relation to autism spectrum disorder. Environ. Health Perspect. 125, 097007. https://doi.org/ 10.1289/EHP604.
- Silver, M.K., Fernandez, J., Tang, J., McDade, A., Sabino, J., Rosario, Z., V ´ elez Vega, C., Alshawabkeh, A., Cordero, J.F., Meeker, J.D., 2021. Prenatal exposure to glyphosate and its environmental degradate, Aminomethylphosphonic Acid (AMPA), and preterm birth: A nested case -control study in the PROTECT cohort (Puerto Rico). Environ. Health Perspect. 129, 057011. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP7295.
- Sittiwang, S., Nimmapirat, P., Suttiwan, P., Promduang, W., Chaikittipornlert, N., Wouldes, T., Prapamontol, T., Naksen, W., Promkam, N., Pingwong, S., Breckheimer, A., Cadorett, V., Panuwet, P., Barr, D.B., Baumert, B.O., OhmanStrickland, P., Fiedler, N., 2022. The relationship between prenatal exposure to organophosphate insecticides and neurodevelopmental integrity of infants at 5weeks of age. Front. Epidemiol. 2, 1039922. https://doi.org/10.3389/ fepid.2022.1039922.
- Solon, O., Riddell, T.J., Quimbo, S.A., Butrick, E., Aylward, G.P., Lou Bacate, M., Peabody, J.W., 2008. Associations between cognitive function, blood lead concentration, and nutrition among children in the central Philippines. J. Pediatr. 152, 237 -243. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2007.09.008.
- Soukup, S.T., Merz, B., Bub, A., Hoffmann, I., Watzl, B., Steinberg, P., Kulling, S.E., 2020. Glyphosate and AMPA levels in human urine samples and their correlation with food consumption: results of the cross-sectional KarMeN study in Germany. Arch. Toxicol. 94, 1575 -1584. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204-020-02704-7.
- Tong, S., Baghurst, P., Vimpani, G., McMichael, A., 2007. Socioeconomic position, maternal IQ, home environment, and cognitive development. J. Pediatr. 151 (284 -288), 288.e1. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2007.03.020.
- Turkmen, R., Birdane, Y.O., Demirel, H.H., Kabu, M., Ince, S., 2019. Protective effects of resveratrol on biomarkers of oxidative stress, biochemical and histopathological changes induced by sub-chronic oral glyphosate-based herbicide in rats. Toxicol. Res. 8, 238 -245. https://doi.org/10.1039/c8tx00287h.
- Vandenberg, L.N., Blumberg, B., Antoniou, M.N., Benbrook, C.M., Carroll, L., Colborn, T., Everett, L.G., Hansen, M., Landrigan, P.J., Lanphear, B.P., Mesnage, R., Vom Saal, F. S., Welshons, W.V., Myers, J.P., 2017. Is it time to reassess current safety standards for glyphosate-based herbicides? J. Epidemiol. Community Health 71, 613 -618. https://doi.org/10.1136/jech-2016-208463.
- Von Ehrenstein, O.S., Ling, C., Cui, X., Cockburn, M., Park, A.S., Yu, F., Wu, J., Ritz, B., 2019. Prenatal and infant exposure to ambient pesticides and autism spectrum disorder in children: population based case-control study. BMJ 1962. https://doi. org/10.1136/bmj.l962.
- Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., Ji, L., Hu, Y., Zhang, J., Wang, C., Ding, G., Chen, L., Kamijima, M., Ueyama, J., Gao, Y., Tian, Y., 2017. Prenatal and postnatal exposure to organophosphate pesticides and childhood neurodevelopment in Shandong. China. Environ. Int. 108, 119 -126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2017.08.010.
- Weiler, H.A., Brooks, S.P.J., Sarafin, K., Fisher, M., Massarelli, I., Luong, T.M., Johnson, M., Morisset, A.-S., Dodds, L., Taback, S., Helewa, M., von Dadelszen, P., Smith, G., Lanphear, B.P., Fraser, W.D., Arbuckle, T.E., 2021. Early prenatal use of a multivitamin diminishes the risk for inadequate vitamin D status in pregnant women: results from the Maternal-Infant Research on Environmental Chemicals (MIREC) cohort study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 114, 1238 -1250. https://doi.org/10.1093/ ajcn/nqab172.
- Wilson, R.D., Committee, G., Wilson, R.D., Audibert, F., Brock, J.-A., Carroll, J., Cartier, L., Gagnon, A., Johnson, J.-A., Langlois, S., Murphy-Kaulbeck, L., Okun, N., Pastuck, M., Contributors, S., Deb-Rinker, P., Dodds, L., Leon, J.A., Lowel, H.L., Luo, W., MacFarlane, A., McMillan, R., Moore, A., Mundle, W., O ' Connor, D., Ray, J., Van den Hof, M., 2015. Pre-conception folic acid and multivitamin supplementation for the primary and secondary prevention of neural tube defects and other folic acidsensitive congenital anomalies. J. Obstet. Gynaecol Can. JOGC J. Obstet. Gynecol. Can. JOGC 37, 534 -552. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1701-2163(15)30230-9.
- Winstone, J.K., Pathak, K.V., Winslow, W., Piras, I.S., White, J., Sharma, R., Huentelman, M.J., Pirrotte, P., Velazquez, R., 2022. Glyphosate infiltrates the brain and increases pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF α : implications for neurodegenerative

M. Hall et al.

disorders. J. Neuroinflammation 19, 193. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974-02202544-5.

Yang, Y., Shi, L., Jin, X., Tong, S., 2023. Association of perinatal factors with suspected developmental delay in urban children aged 1 -36 months - a large-scale crosssectional study in China. BMC Pediatr. 23, 11. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-02203819-9.

Young, J.G., Eskenazi, B., Gladstone, E.A., Bradman, A., Pedersen, L., Johnson, C., Barr, D.B., Furlong, C.E., Holland, N.T., 2005. Association between in utero organophosphate pesticide exposure and abnormal reflexes in neonates. Neurotoxicology 26, 199 -209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2004.10.004.