<!-- PageHeader="Reproductive Toxicology 34 (2012) 261-274" -->


<figure>

ELSEVIER

</figure>


Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Reproductive Toxicology

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/reprotox


<figure>

----
\-

Reproductive
Toxicology
Dew-logemental Basis of Health and Disesew

</figure>


# Adverse effects on sexual development in rat offspring after low dose exposure to a mixture of endocrine disrupting pesticides

Ulla Hassa,*, Julie Bobergª, Sofie Christiansenª, Pernille Rosenskjold Jacobsenª,
Anne Marie Vinggaarda, Camilla Taxviga, Mette Erecius Poulsenª, Susan Strange Herrmanna,
Bodil Hamborg Jensenª, Annette Petersenª, Line Harder Clemmensenb, Marta Axelstad a

a National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark, Mørkhøj Bygade 19, DK-2860 Søborg, Denmark

b DTU Informatics, Technical University of Denmark, Richard Petersens Plads, Building 305, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark


## ARTICLE INFO

Article history:
Received 30 March 2012
Received in revised form 16 May 2012
Accepted 21 May 2012
Available online 29 May 2012

Key words:
Epoxiconazole
Mancozeb
Prochloraz
Tebuconazole
Procymidone
Rat
Mixture
Developmental
Endocrine disrupter
Nipple retention


## ABSTRACT

The present study investigated whether a mixture of low doses of five environmentally relevant endocrine
disrupting pesticides, epoxiconazole, mancozeb, prochloraz, tebuconazole and procymidone, would
cause adverse developmental toxicity effects in rats. In rat dams, a significant increase in gestation length
was seen, while in male offspring increased nipple retention and increased incidence and severity of geni-
tal malformations were observed. Severe mixture effects on gestation length, nipple retention and genital
malformations were seen at dose levels where the individual pesticides caused no or smaller effects when
given alone. Generally, the mixture effect predictions based on dose-additivity were in good agreement
with the observed effects. The results indicate that there is a need for modification of risk assessment
procedures for pesticides, in order to take account of the mixture effects and cumulative intake, because
of the potentially serious impact of mixed exposure on development and reproduction in humans.

@ 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.


## 1. Introduction

The high prevalence of disorders related to the endocrine
system, e.g. hormone-dependent cancers, fertility problems and
congenital malformations of reproductive organs, is a point of
increasing concern in the western world [1,2]. Many genetic, envi-
ronmental and lifestyle factors may be involved in these adverse
effects, one of them possibly being exposures to endocrine disrupt-
ing chemicals (EDCs).

Currently, risk assessment of chemicals including pesticides is
based on the no observed adverse effect levels (NOAELs) for effects
of single compounds. Based on results from animal studies, expo-
sure to single endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) generally
does not cause concern for adverse reproductive effects in humans.
Humans are, however, exposed to a mixture of several EDCs [3,4],
and during the last decade, scientific and regulatory focus has grad-
ually begun shifting towards examining the effects of mixtures.

Since 2005 the European Union member states have for example
been obliged to evaluate and if possible refine existing methodolo-
gies in order to take combined actions of pesticides into account
during risk assessment and especially when establishing maximum
residue levels (MRLs) [5].

In studies where experimental animals have been exposed to
several endocrine disrupters simultaneously, substantial mixture
effects on reproductive development have been seen even though
each of the individual EDCs were present at low, ineffective doses
[6-8]. In addition, there are indications that cumulative exposure
to EDCs including pesticides may play a role in relation to effects
on human development, as epidemiological studies have reported
increased prevalence of cryptorchidism in sons of women work-
ing as gardeners [9] or living on farms where pesticides have been
used [10,11]. Furthermore, epidemiological studies have found
associations between cryptorchidism and hypospadia and total
estrogenic load measured in mother's placenta extracts [12], and
association between congenital cryptorchidism and levels of cer-
tain organochlorine pesticides in breast milk [13]. Swan et al. [4]
found that decreases in anogenital distance among male infants are
associated with prenatal phthalate exposure, and Pierik et al. [14]

\* Corresponding author. Tel .: +45 35 88 70 44; fax: +45 35 88 70 01.
E-mail address: ulha@food.dtu.dk (U. Hass).

<!-- PageFooter="0890-6238/$ - see front matter @ 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.reprotox.2012.05.090" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="262" -->
<!-- PageHeader="U. Hass et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 34 (2012) 261-274" -->

identified paternal exposures to pesticides and smoking as factors
associated with these congenital malformations. Thus, it is impor-
tant to bear in mind that exposures to endocrine disrupters may
contribute to a combined adverse effect, even though the effects
of the single compounds are undetectable [6,8,15]. The findings
from animal mixture studies should have major implications for
the human risk assessment of EDCs, as they imply that the current
use of NOAELs for single chemicals may lead to an underesti-
mation of the potential risk for humans exposed to mixtures of
chemicals.

A wide range of pesticides is suspected to act as endocrine dis-
rupters, and there can be many different mechanisms causing the
observed effects in animal studies. The five presently investigated
pesticides, epoxiconazole, mancozeb, prochloraz, tebuconazole
and procymidone, were selected based on information on pesticide
use in Denmark and within the EU, and on their endocrine disrupt-
ing activity and effects. Procymidone competitively antagonizes the
binding of androgens to the androgen receptor, and thereby mainly
affects the reproductive development in male offspring [16,17].
Common features of the azole fungicides epoxiconazole, prochloraz
and tebuconazole are that they increase gestational length in dams,
virilize female pups and affect steroid hormone levels in fetuses
and/or dams [18-20]. Mancozeb acts mainly via disruption of the
thyroid hormone system and is therefore suspected of disrupting
brain development [21,22].

The applied extended developmental toxicity model in rats has
previously been employed by our group to characterize the effects
of developmental exposure to EDCs on male offspring, and detailed
mixture experiments have revealed that statistically significant
mixture effects can be observed when anti-androgenic chemicals
are combined at levels below their individual NOAELs [6,7]. Before
initiating the experimental study presented here, the mixture ratio
and dose levels of the individual pesticides were chosen based on
earlier obtained dose-response relationships for each of the five
pesticides. Hereafter, range-finding studies were performed to find
a combined dose that represented the pesticides at doses close to
their individual NOAELs, without causing major effects on the preg-
nant animals or on pup survival. Data from these range-finding
studies are presented in Jacobsen et al. [23] and were used to set
the dose levels of the mixture and of the individual compounds.
Three different doses of the pesticide mixture and two doses of
the individual pesticides were investigated in pregnant rat dams,
and gestation length as well as anogenital distance, nipple reten-
tion and incidence of congenital malformations in the offspring
were registered. Based on single chemical dose-response curves
obtained in both previous and the present study, the effects of the
pesticide mixture were predicted using the mathematical models
dose-addition and independent action. Other endpoints sensitive
to endocrine disruption, such as reproductive organ weights and
histopathology, semen quality and a wide range of neurobehav-
ioral endpoints were also measured in the study, and are presented
in Jacobsen et al. [24]. Furthermore, chemical analysis of the pes-
ticides in blood samples from dams and offspring were used for
evaluating if mixture exposure and exposure to the single pes-
ticides would lead to comparable blood levels. These results are
presented in Herrmann et al. [25].

One goal of mixture toxicology is to estimate the toxicities of
untested mixtures of chemicals on basis of information on indi-
vidual components. For predicting combined effects of the five
pesticides, we assumed that each pesticide in the mixture did
not exacerbate or diminish the effects of the other pesticides. The
choice of an appropriate model for calculation of additivity expec-
tations is essential for assessments of mixture effects, because it
is in relation to these additivity expectations that combination
effects are judged in terms of synergisms or antagonisms [26]. Mix-
ture effects according to "additivity" assumptions can be calculated

by using two alternative concepts, dose addition and independent
action. Dose addition looks at mixture effects in terms of a "dilution
principle". It assumes that one chemical can be replaced totally or in
part by an equal fraction of an equi-effective dose of another, with-
out diminishing the overall combined effect [27]. Dose addition is
often used for mixtures composed of chemicals that act through a
similar or common mode of action [28-32]. Its application to the
present mixture of five pesticides appeared justified because all
pesticides are endocrine disruptors and - apart from mancozeb -
produce a common effect outcome, i.e. anti-androgenic effects in
male offspring. However, it can be argued with equal justification
that the similarity assumption for dose addition is not applicable
to the chosen mixture because the pesticides produce their effects
by a diversity of molecular mechanisms. For this reason, we also
employed the alternative concept of independent action to esti-
mate additivity expectations. Independent action assumes that the
joint effects of a combination of agents can be calculated by adopt-
ing the statistical concept of independent events [33]. It is viewed
as appropriate for mixtures of chemicals with diverse modes of
action [28], however, dose addition and independent action often
yield additive mixture effect predictions within the same range.

The overall aim was to explore whether a mixture of environ-
mentally relevant endocrine disrupting pesticides with dissimilar
modes of action would cause adverse developmental toxicity
effects in rats at dose levels below NOAELs for the individ-
ual pesticides. Furthermore, the aim was to investigate whether
dose-additivity or independent action predictions of the expected
mixture effects resulted in useful estimates compared to the
observed mixture effects for relevant endpoints. The mixture and
the single pesticides were also investigated using in vitro assays, in
order to compare these results with those from the rat study, and
evaluate the usability of alternative in vitro methods for estimating
potential mixture effects.


## 2. Materials and methods


### 2.1. Chemicals

The five pesticides used were epoxiconazole (CAS no. 106325-08-8, purity 99.0),
mancozeb (CAS no. 8018-01-7, purity 76.0), prochloraz (CAS no. 67747-09-5, purity
98.5), tebuconazole (CAS no. 107534-96-3, purity 98.5) and procymidone (CAS no.
32809-16-8, purity 99.5). All chemicals were purchased in a technical quality from
VWR-Bie & Berntsen, Herlev, Denmark. Corn oil (Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark)
was used as vehicle.


### 2.2. Animals and exposure

The animal studies were performed under conditions approved by the Danish
Animal Experiments Inspectorate and by the in-house Animal Welfare Committee.

The study included 198 time-mated nulliparous, young adult animals (Han-
Tac:WH, Taconic Europe, Ejby, Denmark) distributed to 14 groups of animals. It
was performed in 4 blocks with a week between each block and the 14 groups were
as equally as possible distributed among the 4 blocks. The animals were housed
in pairs until GD (Gestation Day) 18 and alone thereafter under standard condi-
tions in semi-transparent polycarbonate cages (15 cm × 27 cm × 43 cm) with Aspen
bedding (Tapvei, Denmark) situated in an animal room with controlled environ-
mental conditions (12 h light-dark cycles with light starting at 9 p.m., light intensity
500 lx, temperature 21 ±2℃, humidity 50% ±5%, ventilation 8 air changes per h).
A complete rodent diet for growing animals ALTROMIN 1314 (Soy- and alfalfa-free
ALTROMIN GmbH, Lage, Germany) and acidified tap water (to prevent microbial
growth) was provided ad libitum. The animals were observed twice daily for signs
of toxicity and body weights were recorded daily during the dosing period.

On the day after arrival, at gestation day (GD) 4, the time-mated animals were
pseudorandomly distributed into groups with similar body weight (bw) distribu-
tions. They were given four days after arrival to adapt to the reversed light-dark cycle
before beginning the exposure. Independently of actual day of delivery, the expected
day of delivery, GD 23, was designated pup day (PD) 1 for the pups. Thereby, the age
of the pups related to the time of conception, but was rather similar to postnatal age.
Dams were dosed daily by gavage, from GD 7 to 21 and from the day after birth to
pup (PD) 16, and were treated at a constant volume of 2 ml/kg/day, with individual
doses based on the body weight of the animal on the day of dosing.

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="263" -->
<!-- PageHeader="U. Hass et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 34 (2012) 261-274" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 1 Doses of the pesticides administered individually and in mixture to pregnant rat dam from GD (gestation day) 7 to PD (pup day) 16 (in mg/kg bw/day) and number of dosed time-mated rats (dams with viable litters) in each group.</caption>
<tr>
<th>Group</th>
<th>nª</th>
<th>Epoxiconazole</th>
<th>Mancozeb</th>
<th>Prochloraz</th>
<th>Tebuconazole</th>
<th>Procymidone</th>
<th>Pesticide mixture</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1: Control</td>
<td>22 (15)</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>2: Pestimix-14.6</td>
<td>22 (17)</td>
<td>1.25</td>
<td>2.08</td>
<td>2.92</td>
<td>4.17</td>
<td>4.17</td>
<td>14.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>3: Pestimix-29.2</td>
<td>22 (9)</td>
<td>2.5</td>
<td>4.17</td>
<td>5.83</td>
<td>8.33</td>
<td>8.33</td>
<td>29.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>4: Pestimix-43.8</td>
<td>22 (14)</td>
<td>3.75</td>
<td>6.25</td>
<td>8.75</td>
<td>12.5</td>
<td>12.5</td>
<td>43.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5: Epoxi-3.75</td>
<td>12 (8)</td>
<td>3.75</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>6: Epoxi-15</td>
<td>10 (4)</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>7: Manz-6.25</td>
<td>12 (5)</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>6.25</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>8: Manz-25</td>
<td>10 (7)</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>9: Prchl-8.75</td>
<td>12 (8)</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>8.75</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>10: Prchl-35</td>
<td>10 (4)</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>35</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>11: Tebu-12.5</td>
<td>12 (8)</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>12.5</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>12: Tebu-50</td>
<td>10 (6)</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>13: Procy-12.5</td>
<td>12 (7)</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>12.5</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>14: Procy-50</td>
<td>10 (4)</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>50</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>

Epoxi: epoxiconazole; Manz: mancozeb; Prchl: prochloraz; Tebu: tebuconazole; Procy: procymidon.

a The large difference between the number of exposed time-mated rats and dams with viable litters was mainly due to unusually low pregnancy rate from the animal
breeders and not to high rates of pre- and postnatal mortality in the offspring.


### 2.3. Mixture composition

To design the mixture of the five pesticides, developmental toxicity data from
previous studies with each of the pesticides were used. The mixture ratio for the five
pesticides was chosen based on the dose-response relationship and the NOAEL for
effects on increased gestation length in dams and perinatal mortality in the offspring
in previous studies in our laboratory (Supplemental Material Table X1). Epoxicona-
zol, prochloraz and tebuconazol cause effects on pregnancy length and perinatal
survival. The effects on perinatal mortality at the LOAELs were more marked for
epoxiconazol and tebuconazol than for prochloraz. Based on this the doses cho-
sen for epoxiconazol and tebuconazol in the mixture were their NOAELs for these
effects, whereas a slightly higher dose of 35 mg/kg/day was chosen for prochloraz.
Neither mancozeb nor procymidone caused effects on pregnancy length or perinatal
survival at the doses studied. For mancozeb, a dose level of 50 mg/kg/day in the mix-
ture was initially chosen, because our earlier studies have shown that dose levels
of 150 mg/kg/day and higher cause marked acute neurotoxicity in pregnant ani-
mals [21]. Due to acute neurotoxicity in a range-finding study using non-pregnant
animals the mancozeb dose was decreased to 25 mg/kg/day in all of the studies in
pregnant animals. The dose level for procymidone was chosen mainly based on the
anti-androgenic potency in our earlier studies (Supplemental Material Table X1).

Upon choosing the mixture ratio, two range-finding studies were performed.
The first was in non-pregnant animals while the second was in pregnant animals,
and they were performed in order to test for toxicity and endocrine disrupting
effects of various mixture doses [23]. The highest dose of the mixture, which did
not cause maternal toxicity in the range-finding study in pregnant animals, was
used as starting point for the present study.

In Table 1 the composition of the pesticide mixture, the doses of the pesticides
administered individually and in mixture and the number of litters in each group are
shown. Four groups of 22 time-mated rats were given daily oral doses of 0, 14.6, 29.2
or 43.8 mg/kg/day of the mixture of the 5 pesticides, whereas ten groups of 10 or 12
time-mated rats were similarly dosed with two doses of the individual pesticides.
The lowest dose of each pesticide was similar to the dose included in the highest
mixture dose and the highest dose of the single pesticides was 4 times higher.


### 2.4. Gestation length, anogenital distance and nipple retention

After delivery, which occurred from GD22 to 24, the weights of dams and indi-
vidual pups were recorded and the pups were counted, sexed, checked for anomalies
and anogenital distance (AGD) was measured using a stereomicroscope. Addition-
ally, anogenital index (AGDI), i.e. AGD/cubic root of body weight was calculated for
all offspring. Pups found dead were macroscopically investigated for changes when
possible. Weight of pups was recorded again on days 6, 13, 22. On PD 13, all male and
female offspring were examined for the presence of areolas/nipples (nipple reten-
tion, NR), described as a dark focal area (with or without a nipple bud) located where
nipples are normally present in female offspring.


### 2.5. Genital malformations in male offspring

On PD 16 and PD 22, 1-3 male pups per litter were randomly selected for
autopsy. On PD 22 the pups were decapitated in CO2/O2 anesthesia. Male reproduc-
tive organs were examined macroscopically for anomalies and testicular descent
and scored for the degree of external genital malformations on a scale from 0 to 3,
with the observer being blinded with respect to dose group.

The scores were:

Score 0 (no effect): Normal genital tubercle, with the urethral opening found at
the tip of the genital tubercle and the preputial skin intact.

Score 1 (mild dysgenesis of the external genitals): A small cavity on the infe-
rior side of the genital tubercle or a minor cleft in the preputial opening was
observed, estimated 0.5-1.4 on an arbitrary scale. The size of the genital tubercle
was decreased.

Score 2 (moderate dysgenesis of the external genitals): The preputial cleft was
larger, estimated 1.5-2.4 on an arbitrary scale. The urethral opening was situated
half-way down towards the base of the genital tubercle (hypospadias).

Score 3 (severe dysgenesis of the external genitals): The preputial cleft was large,
estimated 2.5-3.5 on an arbitrary scale. The urethral opening was situated further
than half-way down the inferior side of the genital tubercle to the base of the genital
tubercle (hypospadia). At the base of the genital tubercle a groove extending laterally
was observed (similar to control females).

Gubernacular length was determined as a measure of testicular descent, as an
increased gubernacular length would indicate cryptorchidism.

All weaned male offspring were scored alive for external genital malformations
shortly after sexual maturation (around PD 50) using a similar scoring system, that
was modified to reflect the development of the external male sex organs.

At the age of approximately 9 months, the 1-2 males per litter were decapitated
in CO2/O2 anesthesia, and external genitals were inspected for the following anoma-
lies: descendent testes, alopecia in the perineal area, cleft phallus and hypospadia.
Malformations were scored using a system with 0 denoting the normal and 3 the
most severe changes. The observer was blinded with respect to dose groups.


### 2.6. Statistics

For all analyses, the alpha level was set at 0.05 and the litter was the statisti-
cal unit. Data were examined for normal distribution and homogeneity of variance,
and if relevant, transformed. In cases where normal distribution and homogene-
ity of variance could not be obtained by data transformation, a non-parametric
Kruskall-Wallis test was used, followed by Wilcoxon's test for pair wise compar-
isons. Data with normal distribution and homogeneity of variance were analyzed
using analysis of variance (ANOVA). When more than one pup from each litter was
examined, statistical analyses were adjusted using litter as an independent, random
and nested factor in ANOVA or litter means were used. Where an overall significant
treatment effect was observed, two-tailed comparison was performed using least
square means or Dunnett. Birth weights were analyzed using the number of offspring
per litter as covariate and AGD was analyzed using body weight as a covariate. Addi-
tionally, anogenital-index (AGDI), i.e. AGD divided by the cube root of body weight,
was analyzed. The cube root was used because this converts a three-dimensional
end point (weight) into a one-dimensional such as the AGD [34].

When analyzing the level of dysgenesis or malformations of external male
organs the scores were categorized into a binary variable with score 0 (normal)
and scores 1, 2 and 3 (mild to severe effect). The results are generally shown both
as number of offspring and number of litters affected per group, because malforma-
tions are rare events that may only affect very few litters. Statistical analysis based
on the litter as unit is therefore rather insensitive and consequently it is current
practice also to include offspring data in the toxicological evaluation. The statistical
analyses of the malformations were done using Fisher's exact test on litter data.

The number of nipple/areolas was assumed to follow a binomial distribution
with a response range between 0 and 0max, with Omax being equal to the biologically
possible maximal number of nipples in rats, either 12 or 13. The choice of 0max Was
decided on considering the global fit (information criterion of Schwarz). To account
for litter effects on NR, correlation structures between number of nipple/areolas and
litter were modeled by the Generalized Estimating Equations method as in Hass
et al. [6]. The number of nipples in the all control group males was zero and it was
therefore necessary to put in 1 nipple in 3 pups from the control group to perform

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="264" -->
<!-- PageHeader="U. Hass et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 34 (2012) 261-274" -->

the statistical model. All statistical analysis was performed using the SAS procedure
PROC GENMOD.

Asterisks in tables and figures, indicate a statistically significant difference com-
pared to controls *p ≤0.05; ** p<0.01. *** p <0.001. All analyses were performed using
SAS Enterprise Guide 3.0, SAS Institute Inc, Cary, NC, USA.


### 2.7. Mixture modeling

The data for the single pesticides comprised the raw data from our previous
studies (overview in Supplemental Material Table X1) and the data for both single
pesticides and the mixture obtained in the present study.

Endpoints considered relevant for this modeling were those observed to show
an effect at mixture dose levels at which the individual pesticides when given alone
caused no or significantly smaller effects. These endpoints included gestation length,
anogenital distance in female offspring, nipple retention and genital malformations
in male offspring. The modeling was, however, not done for the latter endpoint due
to lack of sufficient data for the single pesticides.

Data were normalized to the control groups of each year (experiment) so that
year did not have to be included in the model as an extra factor. The effect of year
was tested and either t test or lmein R was used.

The increase in gestation length was normalized to lie between zero and one,
where the mean of the control group was the minimum (0) and the mean of the
control group plus 2 was the maximum (1).

The endpoint nipple retention (NR) was scaled using the mean of the female
controls (approximately 12-12.5). Values larger than this maximum were thresh-
olded to the maximum. After scaling according to the female controls, the controls
were not included in the analyses, but they are plotted in the figures as reference
points.

The endpoint AGDI in female offspring was transformed for each experiment
to lie between zero and one, scaled with the mean of the female controls as the
minimum value, and the mean of the male controls as the maximum value.

For NR in males and AGDI in females, the same model and fitting method was
used since these endpoints have several observations per litter. First, a binomial
logit curve was fitted to the observations for each of the pesticides. Generalized
Estimating Equations (GEEs) were used to perform the fit [35-37]. This method is
particularly good when accounting for correlations within subject (here litter), but
independence across litters, i.e. the model is based on pup level but taking the litter
effect into account. The variance of the estimates can be incorrect if the correlation
structure is not accounted for. In order to keep the number of parameters to a min-
imum in this model we assumed that the correlation is so called "exchangeable",
meaning that it is the same for any pair of litters.

The models were fitted using the function gee [38] in the R package gee from
CRAN.

For gestation length, a generalized linear model with a binominal logit (GLM)
was fitted to all observations for the five pesticides and the pesticide mixture. As
gestation length was measured on dam level, there was only one observation per
litter, and therefore a GLM rather than a GEE was used. The glm() function in the
statistics program R was used for estimation and prediction.

Either a GEE or GLM was fitted to the same endpoints for both single pes-
ticides and the mixture. Two models for prediction were considered. First, the
dose-additivity predictions were estimated. These are defined by the effect dose
of the pesticide mixture:

EDx
mixture
ure = P + P2 P3 P4 P5)
EDX1

EDX2
EDX3
EDX4
EDX5
-1

for the effect doses of the five pesticides in question, and where pi is the pro-
portion of pesticide i in the mixture. The parametric delta method (closely related
to parametric bootstrapping) was performed to estimate the EDx mixture from the fit-
ted models and their variance estimates [39]. The distributions of the parameter
estimates were sampled using the estimated variances of the parameters a and B.
Random normal samples were used to sample new parameters and thereby obtain
predictions using a Monte Carlo sampling strategy assuming a normal distribution
of the parameters a and B. A thousand samples were drawn for each parameter, and
a dense grid of the doses was used to estimate the effect doses.

Secondly, the independent actions model [33]:

Exmixture =1-(1-Ex1)x(1-Ex2)x(1-Ex3)x (1 -Ex4) x (1 - Ex5)

was likewise estimated using such a Monte Carlo sampling. Here, Ex; denotes the
fractional effect (in %) of the ith pesticide, where we have Xi =Xmixture.Pi. Note that
the independent actions formula is given for the effect whereas the dose-additivity
model is given in terms of the effect dose.

The same analyses were also performed with winsorization, as described by
Scholze et al. [40]. This means that the fitting was performed iteratively with obser-
vations which fall outside 3 times the standard deviation of the mean prediction are
adjusted to the value of 3 times the SD and then a new fit is performed etc.


### 2.8. In vitro assays

The pesticide mixture for the in vitro studies was designed based on the mix-
ture applied for the in vivo studies. The ratio of the 5 pesticides (epoxiconazole,
mancozeb, prochloraz, tebuconazole and procymidone) was:


<table>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th colspan="5">Epoxiconazole Mancozeb Prochloraz Tebuconazole Procymidone</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>mg basis</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>35</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>50</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Molar basis</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>12</td>
</tr>
</table>


#### 2.8.1. Androgen receptor reporter gene assay

The ability of the pesticides to activate the androgen receptor (AR) and to inhibit
androgen-induced activation of the AR was tested in an AR reporter gene assay based
on AR-transfected Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells as described by Kjaerstad et al.
[41]. The test compounds were tested in triplicates within the range 0.03-30 p.M,
and luciferase activity was measured as described by Kjaerstad et al. [41].

Cytotoxicity experiments were performed as described by Kjaerstad et al. [41].


#### 2.8.2. T-screen for thyroid receptor activity

The T-screen assay was used for in vitro detection of the agonistic and antago-
nistic properties of the test compounds at the level of the thyroid hormone receptor
(TR). The GH3 cells employed in the T-screen assay is a rat pituitary tumor cell line,
which growth is dependent on the thyroid hormone (TH) 3,3',5-triiodothyronine
(T3), and which has a high expression of TR. The growth stimulatory effect of T3
is mediated by specific, high-affinity TRs that upon binding of THs bind to thyroid
hormone responsive elements (TREs) in the cell nucleus ultimately leading to gene
expression and subsequent cell proliferation [42]. The rat pituitary cell line GH3
were obtained from American type culture collection (ATCC), and the assay was
carried out as described by Taxvig et al. [43].

All compounds or mixtures were tested in triplicate (0, 0.01, 0.375, 1, 3, 10,
and 30 p.M) and were tested both in the absence or presence of 0.22 nM T3 (T3-
EC50) to test for agonistic and antagonistic potency. Control wells contained cells
and test medium with the same amount of DMSO [0.1%] as the exposed cells. After
incubation for 96 h, cell growth was measured using the dye resazurine [44]. 100 pl,
of a 0.005 mg/ml resazurine solution in PBS, was added to each well, and plates were
incubated 3 h at 37 ℃, protected from light. Fluorescence was measured (excitation
wavelength 560 nm/emission. 590 nm) on a Wallac Victor 1420 multilabel counter
(PerkinElmer Life Sciences).


#### 2.8.3. Steroid synthesis in the H295R cell line

The pesticides were investigated for effects on the synthesis of estradiol, pro-
gesterone, and testosterone in the human adrenocortical carcinoma cell line H295R
(ATCC, CRL-2128) as described previously [45]. In brief, cells were seeded at a den-
sity of 3 x 105 cells/well in 24-well culture plates (Costar 3524, Corning, NY, USA)
with DMEM/F12 medium (Gibco, Paisley, UK) supplemented with 2.0% Nu-serum
(BD Sciences Denmark) along with 1% ITS + premix (containing 6.25 µg/ml insulin,
6.25 µg/ml transferrin, 6.25 ng/ml selenium, 1.25 mg/ml BSA and 5.35 µg/ml linoic
acid; BDSciences Denmark) and incubated for 24h at 37 ℃ in a humidified atmo-
sphere of 5% CO2/air.

The pesticides were added (1 ml) to the cells in triplicates at six concentra-
tions. Control wells contained the same amount of DMSO (0.1%) as exposed cells.
After 48 h incubation the medium was removed and stored at -20℃ until analy-
sis. Hormones were measured using commercial hormone kits from Wallac Delfia
(PerkinElmerDenmark, Hvidovre, Denmark). Cytotoxicity was evaluated by means
of the MTT assay as described by Mosman [46], measuring the absorbance at 570 nm
after 1.5-2 h incubation on a Wallac multilabel 1420 counter.


## 3. Results


### 3.1. Pregnancy, litter and offspring data

Pregnancy and litter data are shown in Table 2. There were no
statistically significant effects on maternal body weight gain from
GD 7 to GD 21 or from GD 7 to PD 1 in exposed dams compared to
controls. No clinical signs of toxicity were observed in the dams and
the number of implantation scars in the uterus, postimplantation
and perinatal loss was similar among groups.

Gestation length was significantly increased in the two highest
mixture groups (groups 3 and 4) compared to controls (p < 0.01 and
p<0.001, respectively) and in the group exposed to the highest dose
of epoxiconazole (p<0.001), but not in any other groups (Table 2).

Offspring data are shown in Table 3. Pup body weights were
unaffected by pesticide exposure at birth and on PD 6, 13 and 22.
Nipple retention in male offspring, an indication of anti-androgenic
activity, was significantly increased in all mixture groups compared
to controls (p<0.001) (Fig. 1). There was also a significant increase

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageFooter="U. Hass et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 34 (2012) 261-274" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 2 Pregnancy and litter data. Data represent group means based on litter means ±SD.</caption>
<tr>
<th>Dams and litters</th>
<th>1: Control</th>
<th>2: Pesti- mix-14.6</th>
<th>3: Pesti- mix-29.2</th>
<th>4: Pesti- mix-43.8</th>
<th>5: Epoxi-3.75</th>
<th>6: Epoxi-15</th>
<th>7: Manz-6.25</th>
<th>8: Manz-25</th>
<th>9: Prchl-8.75</th>
<th>10: Prchl-35</th>
<th>11: Tebu-12.5</th>
<th>12: Tebu-50</th>
<th>13: Procy-12.5</th>
<th>14: Procy-50</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No. of dams</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>17</td>
<td rowspan="2">10 (9)</td>
<td rowspan="2">15 (14)</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>4</td>
<td rowspan="2">8</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>(litters)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Maternal weight gain GD7-GD21</td>
<td>88.1 ±13.2</td>
<td>88.6±11.6</td>
<td>86.7</td>
<td>±8.6 77.1 ±12.8</td>
<td>87.3±16.1</td>
<td>84.0±21.1</td>
<td>87.4±5.7</td>
<td>84.1 ±11.4</td>
<td>85.9±9.6</td>
<td>85.0±5.0</td>
<td>85.4±15.6</td>
<td>82.5 ±10.2</td>
<td>86.6±10.0</td>
<td>85.0±3.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Maternal weight gain GD7-PD1</td>
<td>18.5±9.8</td>
<td>17.4±9.5</td>
<td>10.7 ±8.3</td>
<td>14.6±17.7</td>
<td>22.9±10.2</td>
<td>20.8±9.4</td>
<td>15.4±7.3</td>
<td>13.3±6.5</td>
<td>14.8±4.8</td>
<td>8.8 ±10.4</td>
<td>11.0±9.6</td>
<td>17.3± 15.8</td>
<td>11.6±8.2</td>
<td>6.3±5.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Body weight gain PD1-13</td>
<td>33.0±9.5</td>
<td>35.5±9.2</td>
<td>31.2±9.3</td>
<td>22.9 ±19.0</td>
<td>30.9±9.7</td>
<td>33.5±4.0</td>
<td>34.8±8.6</td>
<td>37.3±3.3</td>
<td>34.7±6.1</td>
<td>36.0±8.4</td>
<td>44.8±9.2</td>
<td>33.7±4.2</td>
<td>39.1 ±6.5</td>
<td>41.8±11.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Gestation length (days)</td>
<td>23.0±0.0</td>
<td>23.0±0.0</td>
<td>23.5±0.5</td>
<td>** 23.6±0.5*</td>
<td>23.1±0.4</td>
<td>23.8±0.5*</td>
<td>23.0±0.0</td>
<td>23.0±0.0</td>
<td>23.2±0.4</td>
<td>22.8±0.5</td>
<td>23.0±0.0</td>
<td>23.1 ±0.2</td>
<td>23.0±0.0</td>
<td>23.0±0.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>% Post- implantation</td>
<td>11.0±24.9</td>
<td>5.4±6.9</td>
<td>6.4±9.9</td>
<td>16.7±25.9</td>
<td>11.7±11.7</td>
<td>4.0±4.6</td>
<td>0.0±0.0</td>
<td>2.3±4.0</td>
<td>3.7±6.0</td>
<td>1.8±3.6</td>
<td>7.9±10.5</td>
<td>5.5±6.5</td>
<td>13.4±35.1</td>
<td>0.0±0.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>loss</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>% Perinatal loss</td>
<td>14.9±25.2</td>
<td>7.3±8.6</td>
<td>23.4±28.3</td>
<td>23.3 ±28.6</td>
<td>13.2±12.6</td>
<td>10.3±15.8</td>
<td>1.8±4.1</td>
<td>3.3±4.2</td>
<td>5.4±7.0</td>
<td>1.8±3.6</td>
<td>8.6±12.3</td>
<td>9.5±5.7</td>
<td>17.3±36.9</td>
<td>1.9 ±3.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Born alive per.</td>
<td>11.1±2.3</td>
<td>11.9±2.5</td>
<td>11.6±2.4</td>
<td>9.8±2.0</td>
<td>10.4±1.8</td>
<td>8.8±3.7</td>
<td>12.2±1.2</td>
<td>12.9±1.7</td>
<td>11.7±1.8</td>
<td>12.0±1.7</td>
<td>11,8±1.9</td>
<td>11.5±2.5</td>
<td>10.8±3.0</td>
<td>12.8±2.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>litter</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>% Postnatal death</td>
<td>4.4±9.4</td>
<td>2.1±4.3</td>
<td>17.4±30.8</td>
<td>8.9±18.1</td>
<td>1.8±5.1</td>
<td>6.8±13.6</td>
<td>1.8±4.1</td>
<td>1.0±2.7</td>
<td>1.7±5.1</td>
<td>0.0±.0</td>
<td>1.0±2.9</td>
<td>4.1 ±6.6</td>
<td>2.0±5.4</td>
<td>1.9±3.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>% Males</td>
<td>48.4±18.8</td>
<td>47.4±17.5</td>
<td>52.4±13.5</td>
<td>51.6±16.3</td>
<td>44.9±28.1</td>
<td>36.0±29.6</td>
<td>49.8±13.7</td>
<td>45,4 ± 12.9</td>
<td>40.2 ±11.9</td>
<td>54.3±12.7</td>
<td>56.2 ±15.2</td>
<td>47.4±16.8</td>
<td>44.6±19.6</td>
<td>53.6±17.3</td>
</tr>
</table>

Epoxi: epoxiconazole; Manz: mancozeb; Prchl: prochloraz; Tebu: tebuconazole; Procy: procymidon; Perinatal loss: loss from implantation to weaning; Postnatal death: death after birth.

\*
p<0.05.

p<0.01.


<table>
<caption>Table 3 Offspring data. Data represent group means based on litter means ± SD. Mix = mixture.</caption>
<tr>
<th>Offspring (data from viable litters)</th>
<th>1: Control</th>
<th>2: pestimix- 14.6</th>
<th>3: pesti- mix-29.2</th>
<th>4: Pestimix- 43.8</th>
<th>5: Epoxi3.75</th>
<th>6: Epoxi15</th>
<th>7: Manz-6.25</th>
<th>8: Manz-25</th>
<th>9: Prchl-8.75</th>
<th>10: Prchl-35</th>
<th>11: Tebu-12.5</th>
<th>12: Tebu-50</th>
<th>13: Procy-12.5</th>
<th>14: Procy-50</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male birth weight (g)</td>
<td>6.5 ± 0.4</td>
<td>6.1 ± 0.4</td>
<td>6.2 ± 0.4</td>
<td>6.4 ± 0.5</td>
<td>6.5 ± 0.2</td>
<td>6.6 ± 0.6</td>
<td>6.2 ± 0.1</td>
<td>6.2 ± 0.2</td>
<td>6.4 ± 0.4</td>
<td>6.3 ± 0.4</td>
<td>6.3 ± 0.4</td>
<td>6.1 ± 0.4</td>
<td>6.2 ± 0.3</td>
<td>6.4 ± 0.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Female birth weight (g)</td>
<td>6.1 ± 0.4</td>
<td>5.9 ± 0.4</td>
<td>5.9 ± 0.5</td>
<td>6.1 ± 0.6</td>
<td>6.1 ± 0.3</td>
<td>6.3 ± 0.6</td>
<td>6.1 ± 0.2</td>
<td>5.9 ± 0.1</td>
<td>6.0 ± 0.4</td>
<td>6.0 ± 0.4</td>
<td>6.0 ± 0.3</td>
<td>5.9 ± 0.2</td>
<td>6.1 ± 0.2</td>
<td>6.1 ± 0.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male AGD (units)</td>
<td>24.5 ± 1.1</td>
<td>23.4 ± 1.2</td>
<td>24.1 ± 1.0</td>
<td>24.0 ± 1.2</td>
<td>25.7 ± 0.9</td>
<td>23.9 ± 1.3</td>
<td>23.9 ± 1.0</td>
<td>24.0 ± 0.9</td>
<td>24.8 ± 0.6</td>
<td>24.6 ± 0.7</td>
<td>24.7 ± 1.3</td>
<td>24.6 ± 0.8</td>
<td>22.8 ± 0.9</td>
<td>22.0 ± 0.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male AGD/cubic root bw (AGDI)</td>
<td>13.1 ± 0.5</td>
<td>12.8 ± 0.7</td>
<td>13.1 ± 0.5</td>
<td>12.9 ± 0.4</td>
<td>13.8 ± 0.4</td>
<td>12.7 ± 1.0</td>
<td>13.0 ± 0.6</td>
<td>13.1 ± 0.4</td>
<td>13.4 ± 0.4</td>
<td>13.4 ± 0.4</td>
<td>13.4 ± 0.7</td>
<td>13.5 ± 0.4</td>
<td>12.4 ± 0.4</td>
<td>11.9 ± 0.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Female AGD (units)</td>
<td>13.6 ± 0.6</td>
<td>13.7 ± 0.8</td>
<td>14.1 ± 0.5</td>
<td>15.0 ± 0.8</td>
<td>14.9 ± 1.0</td>
<td>14.3 ± 0.9</td>
<td>14.2 ±0.9</td>
<td>13.5 ± 0.5</td>
<td>14.1 ± 0.8</td>
<td>14.5 ± 0.4</td>
<td>14.4 ±1.0</td>
<td>14.5 ± 0.5</td>
<td>13.4 ± 0.4</td>
<td>13.3 ± 0.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">Fem. AGD/cubic root bw (AGDI)</td>
<td rowspan="2">7.4 ± 0.3</td>
<td>7.6 ± 0.5</td>
<td>7.8 ± 0.3</td>
<td>8.2 ± 0.3</td>
<td>8.1 ± 0.6</td>
<td>7.8 ± 0.7</td>
<td>7.8 ± 0.5</td>
<td>7.5 ± 0.2</td>
<td>7.8 ± 0.5</td>
<td>8.0 ± 0.2</td>
<td>7.9 ± 0.6</td>
<td>8.0 ± 0.2</td>
<td>7.3 ± 0.2</td>
<td>7.3 ± 0.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No. Areolas malesª</td>
<td>0.0 ± 0.0</td>
<td>1.9 ±1.6</td>
<td>3.3 ± 0.9</td>
<td>5.3 ± 1.1 ***</td>
<td>0.1 ± 0.2</td>
<td>0.5 ± 1.0</td>
<td>0.1 ± 0.1</td>
<td>0.6 ± 0.6</td>
<td>0.3 ± 0.2</td>
<td>1.7 ± 1.2</td>
<td>0.5 ± 0.8</td>
<td>1.6 ± 0.4 ***</td>
<td>2.8 ± 1.2</td>
<td>6.0 ± 2.0 ***</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No. Areolas. females</td>
<td>12.0 ± 0.4</td>
<td>13.4 ± 3.9</td>
<td>12.4 ± 0.4</td>
<td>12.5 ± 0.4</td>
<td>12.4 ± 0.3</td>
<td>12.8 ± 0.5</td>
<td>12.2 ± 0.1</td>
<td>12.4 ± 0.1</td>
<td>12.3 ± 0.2</td>
<td>12.1 ± 0.2</td>
<td>12.5 ± 0.6</td>
<td>12.2 ± 0.2</td>
<td>12.2 ± 0.2</td>
<td>12.4 ± 0.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male body weight PD 6 (g)</td>
<td>12.9 ± 1.3</td>
<td>12.2 ± 1.3</td>
<td>12.0 ± 1.3</td>
<td>12.5 ± 1.5</td>
<td>13.1 ± 0.9</td>
<td>13.2 ± 1.0</td>
<td>12.3 ± 0.7</td>
<td>11.8 ± 0.4</td>
<td>12.7 ± 1.2</td>
<td>12.9 ± 1.7</td>
<td>12.1 ± 1.7</td>
<td>12.3 ± 1.2</td>
<td>12.4 ± 0.7</td>
<td>12.2 ± 1.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Female body weight PD 6 (g)</td>
<td>12.5 ± 1.2</td>
<td>11.9 ± 1.4</td>
<td>11.6 ± 1.4</td>
<td>11.9 ± 1.3</td>
<td>12.8 ± 1.4</td>
<td>12.2 ± 1.0</td>
<td>12.1 ± 0.6</td>
<td>11.4 ± 0.5</td>
<td>12.1 ± 1.2</td>
<td>12.2 ± 1.7</td>
<td>11.9 ± 1.7</td>
<td>12.1 ± 1.2</td>
<td>12.2 ± 0.7</td>
<td>12.0 ± 1.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male body weight PD 13 (g)</td>
<td>26.1 ± 4.1</td>
<td>24.0 ± 2.7</td>
<td>25.1 ± 2.9</td>
<td>26.7 ± 3.9</td>
<td>25.9 ± 3.0</td>
<td>28.0 ± 2.4</td>
<td>24.6 ± 2.4</td>
<td>23.0 ± 1.0</td>
<td>25.6 ± 1.5</td>
<td>24.9 ± 2.7</td>
<td>24.2 ± 2.7</td>
<td>24.8 ± 2.0</td>
<td>24.9 ± 1.0</td>
<td>24.3 ± 2.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fem. body weight PD 13 (g)</td>
<td>25.4 ± 3.9</td>
<td>23.7 ± 3.0</td>
<td>24.4 ± 2.8</td>
<td>24.3 ± 4.6</td>
<td>26.0 ± 4.1</td>
<td>26.5 ± 2.2</td>
<td>24.4 ± 2.5</td>
<td>22.7 ± 1.4</td>
<td>24.6 ± 1.8</td>
<td>24.0 ± 2.7</td>
<td>23.9 ± 2.1</td>
<td>24.4 ± 2.4</td>
<td>24.5 ± 1.4</td>
<td>23.6 ± 2.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male body weight PD 22 (g)</td>
<td>45.6 ± 6.7</td>
<td>41.5 ± 4.4</td>
<td>44.0 ± 5.6</td>
<td>46.8 ± 7.0</td>
<td>43.3 ± 4.6</td>
<td>46.8 ± 3.5</td>
<td>42.9 ± 4.2</td>
<td>40.4 ± 1.6</td>
<td>43.2 ± 3.3</td>
<td>42.4 ± 5.0</td>
<td>43.0 ± 4.6</td>
<td>43.8 ± 4.5</td>
<td>42.5 ± 1.3</td>
<td>43.0 ± 4.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fem. body weight PD 22 (g)</td>
<td>45.2 ± 6.5</td>
<td>41.1 ± 4.2</td>
<td>41.9 ± 3.9</td>
<td>44.8 ± 5.8</td>
<td>46.3 ± 7.7</td>
<td>46.7 ± 3.2</td>
<td>42.6 ± 3.5</td>
<td>40.3 ± 2.2</td>
<td>42.3 ± 4.0</td>
<td>41.3 ± 4.9</td>
<td>42.7 ± 3.4</td>
<td>42.8 ± 4.5</td>
<td>42.4 ± 1.3</td>
<td>41.3 ± 4.9</td>
</tr>
</table>

Epoxi: epoxiconazole; Manz: mancozeb; Prchl: prochloraz; Tebu: tebuconazole; Procy; procymidon.

a The number of nipples in the control group males was zero and it was therefore necessary to put in 1 nipple in 3 pups from the control group to perform the statistical model.

p<0.05.

p<0.01.

p<0.001.


<!-- PageNumber="265" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="266" -->
<!-- PageHeader="U. Hass et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 34 (2012) 261-274" -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 1. Effects of single and combined exposure to procymidone, prochloraz, tebu- conazole, epoxiconazole and mancozeb on nipple retention in male pups PD 13. Results shown are group means ± standard deviation. See Table 3 for more details. The number of nipples in female controls is normally 12. *** p-Values are &lt;0.001. #The difference between Pestimix-43.8 (group 4) and procymidone-12.5 (group13) is statistically significant (p&lt;0.001).</figcaption>

9.0

***

8.0

7.0

\#

***

6.0

5.0

\#

***

***

4.0

***

***

3.0

***

2.0

***

1.0

0.0

I

T

1: Control

2: Pestimix-14.6

3: Pestimix-29.2

4: Pestimix-43.8

5: Epoxyconazole-3.75

6: Epoxyconazole-15

7: Mancozeb-6.25

8: Mancozeb-25

9: Prochloraz-8.75

10: Prochloraz-35

11: Tebuconazole-12.5

12: Tebuconazole-50

13: Pracymidon-12.5

14: Procymidon-50

</figure>


in the groups exposed to the high dose of mancozeb (p<0.05),
prochloraz (p<0.001), tebuconazole (p<0.001) and both doses of
procymidone (p<0.001) (Fig. 1). The magnitude of the effects in
the highest mixture group was significantly higher than the effect
induced by the low dose of procymidone (p<0.001), although the
procymidone dose was the same in the two groups.

In the male offspring, no statistically significant changes on
anogenital distance (AGD) were seen in the mixture groups. The
data for the single chemical exposures showed that the low dose
of epoxiconazole induced longer AGD in male pups compared to
controls (p<0.01), whereas the high dose had no effect. Both doses
of procymidone induced shorter male AGD (p<0.01, and p<0.001,
respectively). In the female offspring, a dose-dependent increase
in anogenital distance was seen, with significantly longer AGDI,
in the two highest mixture groups compared to controls (p<0.05
and p<0.001, respectively). A similar effect was seen in animals
exposed to both doses of prochloraz (p <0.05 and p <0.01) and tebu-
conazole (p <0.05 and p = 0.001) and in the group exposed to the low
dose of epoxiconazol (p <0.01) but not in female pups exposed to a
four times higher dose of epoxiconazole (Table 3).


### 3.2. Genital malformations in male offspring

The results of the scoring of external genital malformations in
male offspring sacrificed on PD 16 and 22 indicated increased num-
ber and severity of genital malformation in the highest mixture
group and the highest dose of procymidone, but the differences
were not statistically significant compared to controls shown in
Supplemental Material Tables X2). No animals had increased guber-
nacular length as an indication of cryptorchidism.

The rest of the male animals were scored for external genital
malformations alive shortly after sexual maturation (around PD
50) and the results were combined for all time points (see Fig. 2
and Table 4). The combined results showed significantly increased
number and severity of external genital malformation in the high-
est mixture group (p=0.006) and the highest dose of procymidone
(p=0.035), compared to controls. The group mean of the percentage
of animals within each litter with external genital malformations
was markedly higher in the highest mixture group than in any of
the groups dosed with the individual pesticides alone at the dose


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 2. Genital malformations in male offspring. Results shown are the group mean of the % of the male offspring within each litter given score 1 (white), score 2 (gray) or score 3 (black). The rest of the animals, i.e. up to 100%, within each group were given score 0. The incidence of genital malformations is significantly increased (p=0.017) in the highest mixture group (Pestimix-43.8, group 4) and the high dose of procymidone (group 14) (p=0.035).</figcaption>

30%

25%

\*

20%

\*

15%

10%

5%

0%

1: Control

2: Pestimix-14.6

3: Pestimix-29.2

4: Pestimix-43.8

5: Epoxyconazole-3.75

6: Epoxyconazole-15

7: Mancozeb-6.25

8: Mancozeb-25

9: Prochloraz-8.75

10: Prochloraz-35

11: Tebuconazole-12.5

12: Tebuconazole-50

13: Procymidon-12.5

14: Procymidon-50

</figure>


included in the mixture (around 17% compared to 0-4%, Fig. 2). The
individual pesticides alone caused no statistically significant effect
at the dose levels included in the mixture.

External malformations related to the reproductive system and
seminal vesicles were observed in a few of the nine months old
animals (Supplemental Material Table X3). Cryptorchidism and
alopecia, in the perineal area, were not observed in any of the adult
males. Two males in the highest mixture group had penile mal-
formation: one had both a severe cleft penis and hypospadia with
urethral opening at the basis of the penis (score 3), the other had a
cleft phallus (score 1). A third male in the highest mixture group had
a malformed seminal vesicle. One male in each of the groups dosed
with mancozeb showed malformation of the seminal vesicle. In the
group dosed with the highest level of procymidone two animals had
cleft phallus (scores 2 and 3, respectively), and a third animal had
malformed seminal vesicle. However, none of the observed effects
were significantly different from control animals.


### 3.3. Mixture modeling - gestation length

General linear model (GLM) fits for the five pesticides are illus-
trated in Supplemental Material Fig. X1. The effect on gestation
length of mancozeb and procymidone was not statistically sig-
nificant (p=0.25 for both pesticides). Therefore, mancozeb and
procymidone were not included in the predictions for the mix-
ture. A fit of the observed pesticide mixture was performed similar
to the single pesticide observations. In addition, predictions were
performed based on the models for the single pesticides and the
dose-additivity and independent addition formulas. The results are
shown in Table 5 and Fig. 3A and B. At high doses, there was a
significant difference between the observed and predicted mixture
effects, and both of the models underestimated the mixture effects.
However, the underestimation was generally smaller for the dose-
additivity prediction than the independent action prediction. The
dose-addition prediction at the lower doses gave a good predic-
tion of the observed effects. In Supplemental Material Table X4
the effect doses for increased gestation length for individual pes-
ticides are summarized. The overall results were the same when
winsorization was used (data not shown).

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="267" -->
<!-- PageHeader="U. Hass et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 34 (2012) 261-274" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 4 External genital malformations in male pups scored on PD 16 or 22 at sectioning or in vivo on PD 50. Values show the number of animals with score 0 (normal), score 1 (slight), score 2 (moderate), or score 3 (severe).</caption>
<tr>
<th>Dose group</th>
<th>No. animals (litters)</th>
<th>Score 0</th>
<th>Score 1</th>
<th>Score 2</th>
<th>Score 3</th>
<th>Score 1, 2 or 3</th>
<th>Statistics</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1: Control</td>
<td>71 (15)</td>
<td>71 (15)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>2: Pestimix-14.6</td>
<td>96 (17)</td>
<td>92 (17)</td>
<td>4 (4)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>4 (4)</td>
<td>NS</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>3: Pestimix-29.2</td>
<td>53 (9)</td>
<td>50 (9)</td>
<td>2 (2)</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td></td>
<td>3 (2)</td>
<td>NS</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>4: Pestimix-43.8</td>
<td>67 (14)</td>
<td>56 (14)</td>
<td>4 (3)</td>
<td>5 (4)</td>
<td>2 (2)</td>
<td>11 (6)*</td>
<td>p=0.006</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5: Epoxi-3.75</td>
<td>38 (7)</td>
<td>36 (7)</td>
<td>2 (1)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>6: Epoxi-15</td>
<td>11 (4)</td>
<td>11 (4)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>7: Manz- 6.25</td>
<td>31 (5)</td>
<td>31 (5)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>8: Manz-25</td>
<td>39 (7)</td>
<td>39 (7)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>9: Prchl-8.75</td>
<td>44 (9)</td>
<td>43 (9)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td></td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td>NS</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>10: Prchl-35</td>
<td>26 (4)</td>
<td>25 (4)</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td>NS</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>11: Tebu-12.5</td>
<td>48 (8)</td>
<td>48 (8)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>12: Tebu-50</td>
<td>27 (6)</td>
<td>26 (6)</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td>NS</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>13: Procy-12.5</td>
<td>38 (7)</td>
<td>38 (7)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>14: Procy-50</td>
<td>25 (4)</td>
<td>19 (4)</td>
<td>2 (2)</td>
<td>3 (2)</td>
<td>1 (1)</td>
<td>6 (2)*</td>
<td>p=0.035</td>
</tr>
</table>

Values in parentheses are the number of litters with offspring having the indicated score. Epoxi: epoxiconazole; manz: mancozeb; Prchl: prochloraz; Tebu: tebuconazole;
Procy: procymidon.

\*
p<0.05.


<table>
<caption>Table 5 Observed and predicted mixture effect doses for increased gestation length (GL). Results shown are mean dose [95% confidence interval].</caption>
<tr>
<th>Relative GL GL (rounded)</th>
<th>10% 23.2</th>
<th>25% 23.5</th>
<th>50% 24.0</th>
<th>75% 24.5</th>
<th>90% 24.8</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Observedª</td>
<td>18.0 [3.4-31.0]</td>
<td>46.5 [37.5-57.5]</td>
<td>75.5 [64.5-93.5]</td>
<td>104.0 [85.0-127.0]</td>
<td>133.0 [101.5-159.0]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dose-additivity</td>
<td>9.49 [8.50-10.5]</td>
<td>64.0 [61.6-66.5]</td>
<td>135.3 [132.8-137.9]</td>
<td>197.8 [195.1-200.5]</td>
<td>256.2 [253.2-259.3]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Independent action</td>
<td>0.5 [0.14-0.86]</td>
<td>0.5 [0-4.05]</td>
<td>173.0 [167.4-178.6]</td>
<td>316.5 [310.5-322.5]</td>
<td>439.5 [433.0-446.0]</td>
</tr>
</table>

a Based on the curve fit shown in Fig. 3A.


### 3.4. Mixture modeling - nipple retention in male offspring

In Supplemental Material Fig. X1 the nipple retention results for
the single chemicals are shown with the estimated model and ±2
standard errors. No statistically significant effect on NR by man-
cozeb was observed and the effect was therefore set to zero in the
predictions

The fitted model of the observed results and the dose-additivity
predictions are illustrated in Fig. 4A and B. Furthermore, the 95%
confidence intervals and the estimates of observed data, the dose-
additivity predictions, and the independent actions predictions are
summarized in Table 6. The results show that for the low doses,
the confidence intervals overlapped and there were no apparent
statistical differences between the observed dose effects and the
dose-additivity predictions. However, at the high doses no over-
lap in the confidence intervals between the observed dose effects
and those predicted by dose-additivity was found. In fact, the dose-
additivity formula underestimated the effects for the high doses of
the mixture. The independent action predictions were seen to like-
wise underestimate the effects for high doses, and overestimated
the effect at low doses. Furthermore, the independent actions
model gave poorer estimates in relation to the observed effects, in
comparison to the dose-additivity model. In Supplemental Material
Table X5 the effect doses for increased nipple retention in male
offspring for individual pesticides are summarized. By using win-
sorization similar results were obtained (data not shown).


### 3.5. Mixture modeling - AGDI in female offspring

As there was a significant effect of year on AGDI in female off-
spring, transformed AGDI observations were used in the analysis.
The same model and fitting method (GEE) as for NR was used
for effects on AGDI. However, only prochloraz could, based on
this, be assumed to have a statistically significant effect on AGDI
(data not shown). The relatively few data available for epoxicona-
zole and tebuconazole suggest that accepting the null-hypothesis

of no effect from these pesticides without further examination is
arguable.

The fitted model of the observed results is illustrated in Fig. 5A.
The results in Table 7 and Fig. 5B show that both independent action
and dose-additivity predictions highly underestimated the effect
of the pesticide mixture. So, although no statistical effect was seen
for epoxiconazole, mancozeb, tebuconazole and procymidone indi-
vidually, a marked contribution to the effect of the mixture was
evident. In Supplemental Material Table X6, the effect doses for
longer AGDI in female offspring for prochloraz are shown. Using
winsorization, the estimated effect doses were slightly higher for
the low effect doses and slightly lower for the high effect doses
(data not shown). However, the overall picture was the same.


### 3.6. In vitro studies

All pesticides except for mancozeb exhibited AR antagonism
in vitro (Fig. 6).The lowest observed effect levels (LOEC) and
cytotoxic concentrations are shown in Supplemental Material
Table X7. The ranking of potencies for AR antagonism was: mix-
ture ~ procymidone > prochloraz ~ epoxiconazole > tebuconazole.
As the content of procymidone in the mixture constitutes only
approximately 1/3 of the total mixture dose, these results indicate
combination effects on AR antagonism in vitro.

In the H295R steroid synthesis assay, epoxiconazole, prochloraz,
tebuconazole, and the mixture were shown to reduce testosterone
levels in the cells, whereas mancozeb and procymidone had no
effect (Fig. 7). Epoxiconazole, prochloraz, tebuconazole and the
mixture also reduced estradiol levels (Fig. 7). Generally the pes-
ticides and the mixture caused an increase in progesterone levels,
although for the mixture and for procymidone the effect was only
seen at the highest concentrations tested (Fig. 7). In general the
effects of prochloraz was most pronounced on all three hormones.

Triiodothyronine (T3) induced dose-dependent proliferation of
the GH3 cells in the T-screen assay as expected (data not shown).
No agonistic effect was observed for the mixture (Supplemental

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="268" -->
<!-- PageHeader="U. Hass et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 34 (2012) 261-274" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 6 Observed and predicted mixture effect doses for the increased nipple retention (NR) in male offspring. Results shown are mean dose [95% confidence interval].</caption>
<tr>
<th>Relative NR NR (rounded)</th>
<th>10% 1</th>
<th>25% 3</th>
<th>50% 6</th>
<th>75% 9</th>
<th>90% 11</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Observedª</td>
<td>2.3 [0.01-4.9]</td>
<td>27.0 [25.5-28.5]</td>
<td>51.5 [49.5-53.5]</td>
<td>76.0 [72.5-79.5]</td>
<td>100.5 [95.0-105.5]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dose-additivity</td>
<td>0.021 [0.020-0.022]</td>
<td>18.85 [17.6-20.1]</td>
<td>98.39 [97.3-99.5]</td>
<td>153.53 [151.9-155.1]</td>
<td>206.45 [204.3-208.5]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Independent action</td>
<td>0.01 [0.01-0.01]</td>
<td>0.01 [0.01-0.01]</td>
<td>41.5 [39.8-43.1]</td>
<td>184.0 [182.5-185.5]</td>
<td>289.0 [287.4-290.6]</td>
</tr>
</table>

a Based on the curve fit shown in Fig. 4A.


<table>
<caption>Table 7 Observed and predicted mixture effect doses for increased anogenital index (AGDI) in female offspring. Results shown are mean dose [95% confidence interval].</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Relative AGDI AGDI (rounded)</th>
<th>10%</th>
<th>25%</th>
<th>50%</th>
<th>75%</th>
<th>90%</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>8.04</th>
<th>8.89</th>
<th>10.30</th>
<th>11.72</th>
<th>12.56</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Observedª</td>
<td>38.0 [34.0-42.0]</td>
<td>104.0 [92.0-124.0]</td>
<td>170.0 [147.0-202.5]</td>
<td>236.0 [199.0-275.0]</td>
<td>302.0 [245.0-346.5]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dose-additivity</td>
<td>224.0 [217.8-230.3]</td>
<td>720.6 [709.6-731.6]</td>
<td>1217 [1200-1234]</td>
<td>1714 [1691-1737]</td>
<td>2210 [2180-2239]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Independent action</td>
<td>209.5 [202.9-216.1]</td>
<td>694.5 [687.9-701.1]</td>
<td>1228 [1211-1245]</td>
<td>1750 [1726-1773]</td>
<td>2255 [2226-2285]</td>
</tr>
</table>

a Based on the curve fit shown in Fig. 5A.


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 3. (A) GLM fit of mixture effect on gestation length (GL). The observations are shown as box plots, red marks =median of observations at a given dose. (B) The observed and predicted mixture effects on gestation length GL. The dose-additivity prediction of the mixture effect doses are in green and the observed curve is in blue. In dotted lines ±2 standard errors are illustrated. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)</figcaption>

Pestimix

a

25.5

25.0

Gestation length

24.5

24.0

23.5

23.0

control

22.5

1

5

10

50

100

500

Dose [mg/kg]

Pestimix

o

25.5

25.0

Observed

Additivity predictions

GEstation length

24.5

24.0

23.5

23.0

22.5

1

5

10

50

100

500

Dose [mg/kg]

</figure>


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 4. (A) GEE fit of mixture effects on nipple retention in male offspring +2 stan- dard errors are illustrated with dashed lines (in blue). The observations are shown as box plots of each litter with red marks at the litter medians. (B) The observed and predicted mixture effect on nipple retention in male offspring. The dose-additivity predictions of the mixture effect doses are in green and the observed curve is in blue. In dotted lines ±2 standard errors are illustrated. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)</figcaption>

Pestimix

a

15

temate control

Number of nipples/aerdas

10

nipple retention

5

0

male control

1

5

10

50

100

500

Dose [mg/kg]

Pestimix

b

15

Observed

Additivity predictions

Number of nipples/aerdas

10

5

o

1

5

10

50 100

500

Dose [mg/kg]

</figure>


<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="269" -->
<!-- PageHeader="U. Hass et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 34 (2012) 261-274" -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 5. (A) GEE fit of mixture effects on anogenital index (AGDI) in female offspring ±2 standard errors are illustrated with dashed lines (in blue). The observations are shown as box plots of each litter with red marks at the litter medians. (B) The observed and predicted mixture doses for effects on anogenital index in female offspring. The dose-additivity predictions are in green, the independent action pre- dictions are in purple. And the observed curve in blue. In dotted lines ±2 standard errors are illustrated. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)</figcaption>

Pestimix

a

14

male control

Anogenital distance index

12

10

o

8

female control

1

5

10

50

100

500

0 1000 2000

Dose [mg/kg]

Pestimix

b

14

Observed

Additivity predictions

Anogenital distance index

12

Independent actions predictions

10

8

1

5

10

50

100

500 1000 2000

Dose [mg/kg]

</figure>


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 6. Androgen receptor antagonism of single pesticides and the mixture (pes- timix) in vitro.</figcaption>

140%

120%

Response (% of control)

100%

80%

60%

Prochloraz

Tebuconazole

40%

Pestimix

Epoxiconazole

20%

Procymidon

Mancozeb

0%

0

0,01

0,1

1

10

100

Concentration (uM)

</figure>


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 7. Changes in levels of testosterone (top) estradiol (middle) and progesterone (bottom) in the H295 steroid synthesis assay after exposure to increasing concen- trations of the 5 pesticides singly or in combination.</figcaption>

3,00

Testosterone

Prochloraz

2,50

Tebuconazole

PestiMix

Fold change (control=1)

Epoxiconazole

2,00

Procymidone

Mancozeb

1,50

1,00

0,50

0

0,001

0,01

0,1

1

10

100

1000

Concentration (AM)

14,25

Progesterone

Prochloraz

Tebuconazole

Fold change (control=1)

12,25

PestiMix

10,25

Epoxiconazole

8,25

Procymidone

6,25

Mancozeb

4,25

2,25

0,25

0

0,001

0,01

0,1

1

10

100

1000

Concentration (uM)

3,00

Estradiol

Prochloraz

Tebuconazole

2,50

Pesti Mix

Fold change (control=1)

Epoxiconazole

2,00

Procymi done

-Mancozeb

1,50

1,00

0,50

.

0

0,001

0,01

0,1

1

10

100

1000

Concentration (uM)

</figure>


Material Fig. X3a). A weak antagonistic effect of the mixture was
observed at concentrations at and above 3.13 uM (Supplemental
Material Fig. X3b). A summary of all in vitro results is shown in
Supplemental Material Table X7.


## 4. Discussion

This study generally aimed to explore the hypothesis that com-
bined developmental exposure to endocrine disrupting pesticides
could lead to adverse developmental toxicity effects at dose lev-
els below NOAELs for the single pesticides, and to investigate if
dose-additivity modeling of the expected mixture effects could give
useful estimates of the observed mixture effects.


### 4.1. Developmental mixture study and mixture modeling

There were no statistically significant effects of pesticide expo-
sure on maternal body weight gain or on pup body weights at birth
or in the postnatal period. For the mixture, this was consistent

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="270" -->
<!-- PageFooter="U. Hass et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 34 (2012) 261-274" -->

with the results from a previous range-finding study [23] in which
maternal and pup body weight gains were only affected at much
higher doses of the mixture.

Several of the investigated endocrine and reproductive end-
points were affected by the combination of the five pesticides, and
the effects were seen at dose levels at which the individual pesti-
cides caused no, or only minor, effects (Table 8). Gestation length
was significantly increased in the two highest mixture groups and
in the group exposed to the highest dose of epoxiconazole, but not
in any other group. The mixture doses consisted of each of the pes-

ticides at 17% or 25% of their NOAEL for effect on gestation length

based on results of previous studies in our laboratory. As the highest
dose of epoxiconazole given alone was four times higher than the
dose included in the highest mixture group, these results showed a
combination effect of the pesticides at dose levels where the indi-
vidual pesticides caused no effects. Increased gestation length of
very similar magnitude was also observed in a similarly exposed
mixture group in the range-finding study [23]. In that study, com-
bined exposure at higher doses induced severe effects manifested
as dystochia (impaired parturition) and high perinatal pup mortal-
ity [23].

To our knowledge, this is the first study to describe mixture
effects on gestation length. The mixture effect is probably due to the
presence of the three azole fungicides in the mixture, epoxicona-
zole, prochloraz and tebuconazole, which have previously been
shown to elicit such effects on gestation length [18,47,48]. Prolon-
gation of the gestation period may possibly be due to an increase in
progesterone in the dams as suggested for epoxiconazole, prochlo-
raz and tebuconazole [18,20]. It has previously been shown that all
three azoles are able to induce progesterone levels in vitro [41] and
this may be the cause of the increased gestation length in vivo as
a decline in progesterone levels in the dams is a prerequisite for
on-time delivery in rats [49].

The dystochia and pup mortality seen in the range finding stud-
ies have previously been observed as common effects for several
azole fungicides [18,47,50,51]. The mode of action for these end-
points may be increased progesterone levels as well, and if this
is the case, then these azole fungicides should be considered as
similarly acting. However, further data are needed to make firm
conclusions. Neither mancozeb nor procymidone have previously
been shown to affect gestation length or perinatal survival at the
doses studied [7,21].

For the endpoint gestation length, application of the dose-
addition model at low doses resulted in a good prediction of the
observed mixture effects. Both dose-additivity and independent
action model predictions underestimated the mixture effects at
high doses. However, the underestimation was generally smaller
for the dose-additivity prediction than the independent action
prediction. Our hypothesis is that the underestimation at high
doses may be due to toxicokinetic interactions as e.g. saturation
of metabolism. We have preliminary data to support this view as
higher pup blood levels of some of the pesticides was found after
mixture exposure than after exposure to the pesticides alone [25].
This is the first study to show mixture effects on the complex end-
point gestation length, and also the first study to show that it is
possible to predict mixture effects using dose-additivity for this
more 'functional' and biologically relevant endpoint as well.
Nipple retention in male offspring was significantly increased in
all mixture groups. For the highest mixture group, the results were
consistent with the results from the range-finding study [23]. Nip-
ple retention was also increased at the highest dose of mancozeb,
prochloraz and tebuconazole and at both doses of procymidone.
However, the effect of the high dose of mancozeb (25 mg/kg) was
numerically quite small. As an earlier study of mancozeb includ-
ing larger groups and higher dose levels (up to 100 mg/kg) did not
show any effect on nipple retention [21], the significant effect in


<table>
<caption>Table 8 Summary of effects found in dams and male rat pups exposed to epoxiconazole (Epoxi), mancozeb (Manz), prochloraz (Prchl), tebuconazole (Tebu) or procymidone (Procy), or a mixture of these pesticides (Pestimix) from GD 7 to PD 16.</caption>
<tr>
<th>Endpoint</th>
<th>Epoxi 3.75 mg/kg</th>
<th>Manz 6.25 mg/kg</th>
<th>Prchl 8.75 mg/kg</th>
<th>Tebu 12.5 mg/kg</th>
<th>PROcy 12.5 mg/kg</th>
<th>Pestimix 43.8 mg/kg</th>
<th>Dose-additivity ?</th>
<th>Joint effect compared to effect of single chemicals at Mix-25%</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Gestation</td>
<td>23.1</td>
<td>23.0</td>
<td>23.2</td>
<td>23.0</td>
<td>23.0</td>
<td>23.6</td>
<td>Yes, slight</td>
<td>Marked joint effect; no</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>length, days</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>synergy at high doses</td>
<td>significant effect of single chemicals</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Nipple</td>
<td>0.1</td>
<td>0.1</td>
<td>0.3</td>
<td>0.5</td>
<td>2.8</td>
<td>5.3</td>
<td>Yes, slight</td>
<td>Marked joint effect;</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>retention,</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>synergy at high</td>
<td>smaller significant effect of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>PND 13,</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>doses</td>
<td>procymidone</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>number</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Genital malformations, %</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Score 1</td>
<td>3.6</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>8.6</td>
<td>n.a.</td>
<td>Marked joint effect; no</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Score 2</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>2.8</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>6.5</td>
<td></td>
<td>significant effect of single</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Score 3</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>1.9</td>
<td></td>
<td>chemicals</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>3.6</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>2.8</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>0.0</td>
<td>17.0</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>

n.a .: not analyzed. Values are expressed as percent of control values for relative organ weights and as increase in number for nipple retention (control value=0.0). Values for genital malformations of external male reproductive
organs are shown as group mean of % offspring within each litter having score 1, 2 or 3 and the sum (control value=0.0%). Statistically significant effects compared to controls are indicated by bold letters.


<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="271" -->
<!-- PageHeader="U. Hass et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 34 (2012) 261-274" -->

the present study is likely to be a random finding. For the other
pesticides, similar effects have to some extent been seen for the
individual pesticides [6,16,18,20,26,47,51-53]. No statistically sig-
nificant effects on nipple retention of mancozeb, prochloraz and
tebuconazole were found at the low dose level, whereas pro-
cymidone caused a significant effect (Table 8). Results on nipple
retention indicate mixture effects, since the magnitude of the effect
in the highest mixture group was significantly higher than the effect
induced by procymidone alone at the dose level included in the
highest mixture. Mixture effects for nipple retention have earlier
been shown after exposure to other mixtures of both similarly and
dissimilarly acting anti-androgens in several rat studies [6,26,54].

The mixture effect prediction based on dose-additivity was
in agreement with the observed effects at low doses, as there
were no statistically significant differences between the predicted
and the observed effect doses. However, dose-additivity generally
underestimated the effects for the high doses of the mixture. The
independent action predictions resulted in even stronger under-
estimations of the effects for high doses, and overestimations
of the effect for the low doses. It has been reported previously
that dose-additivity gives a good prediction of mixture effects of
nipple retention with both similarly and dissimilarly acting anti-
androgens [6,26,54].

In male offspring, no statistically significant effects on anogen-
ital distance (AGD) were seen in the mixture groups. At the dose
levels included in the mixture, epoxiconazole induced longer AGD,
whereas procymidone induced shorter AGD. Consequently, the lack
of effect in the mixture group might be due to opposite actions of
these compounds.

In the female offspring, significantly longer AGDI, was seen at
the two highest mixture doses. A similar effect was seen in female
offspring given the low dose levels of epoxiconazole, prochloraz
and tebuconazole, i.e. at doses equal to those included in the highest
mixture dose. No effect was seen in female offspring dosed with a
four times higher dose of epoxiconazole and we hypothesize that
the finding at the low dose may be a random finding or alternatively,
the lack of effect at the high dose may be due to a limited group
size. However, the high doses of both prochloraz and tebuconazole
did cause increased female AGDI in the present study. The AGD
effect caused by the mixture is probably due to the three azole
fungicides as earlier studies in our laboratory have shown similar
effects for epoxiconazole, prochloraz and tebuconazole [18,53]. The
mechanism underlying the increased AGDI in the females may be
the increased progesterone levels in the dams causing virilization
of the female genitals [55].

Both independent action and dose-additivity predictions highly
underestimated the effect of the pesticide mixture on AGDI in
females. So, although statistically significant effect was neither seen
in the combined analysis of the results in the present study, nor in
the historical data for epoxiconazole, mancozeb, tebuconazole and
procymidone individually, some of the pesticides seem to have con-
tributed to the effect observed after mixture exposure. The present
study showed significant effects of the low doses of epoxicona-
zole, prochloraz and tebuconazole, whereas no effect on female
AGDI was seen for mancozeb and procymidone. Earlier studies in
our laboratory have also shown similar effects of epoxiconazole,
prochloraz and tebuconazole [18,53]. The effect in the mixture
groups was therefore most likely caused by the combined expo-
sure to the three azole fungicides. The finding that mixed exposure
to endocrine disrupters can lead to increased female AGD is new
and more knowledge on this endpoint is needed.

An increased incidence and severity of malformations in the
highest mixture group and the highest dose of procymidone was
found. At the same mixture dose, the incidence of genital dysge-
nesis in the range-finding study [23] was around 40%, whereas
the incidence in the present mixture study was around 17%. This

difference may be related to the lower number of litters in the
groups in the range-finding study and hence greater uncertainty
in results. The percentage of offspring with genital malformations
was markedly higher in the highest mixture group than in any of
the groups dosed with the individual pesticides alone at the dose
included in the mixture (Table 8). The individual pesticides alone
caused no statistically significant effect at this dose level. As such,
these results show severe mixture effects at dose levels where the
individual pesticides caused no effect when given alone. Similar
results were found in another mixture study of three similarly act-
ing anti-androgens, i.e. the AR antagonists flutamide, procymidone
and vinclozolin [6]. Modeling was not done for genital malforma-
tions, because there were insufficient data for the single pesticides
regarding this endpoint.


### 4.2. In vitro studies

The objective of performing the in vitro assays was to eval-
uate the predictability of in vitro methods for estimating in
vivo developmental effects. The ranking of the potencies for
AR antagonism was: mixture ~ procymidone > prochloraz ~ epox-
iconazole > tebuconazole. As the content of procymidone in the
mixture actually constituted only approximately 1/3 of the total
mixture dose, these results indicate combination effects on this
endpoint. This is in line with previous observations that chemicals
act additively to antagonize AR [56].

Epoxiconazole, prochloraz and tebuconazole and the mixture
were all shown to reduce testosterone and estradiol levels and
increase progesterone levels in H295R cells. In general the effects of
prochloraz was most pronounced on all three hormones. In regards
to translating the in vitro results into in vivo effects in developmen-
tal rat studies, the lack of effects of mancozeb on steroid hormone
synthesis in vitro fit well with the lack of observed anti-androgenic
effects of mancozeb in vivo. Based on the in vitro results, one might
also expect to see an effect on the measured hormone levels, par-
ticularly on the progesterone levels in the rats. In the present study,
progesterone levels were unfortunately only investigated in the
offspring at 50 days of age, and here no significant effects were
seen [24]. However, results from previous in vivo studies with azole
fungicides show that pregnant rats dosed with epoxiconazole (15
and 50 mg/kg bw/day) and tebuconazole (50 and 10 mg/kg bw/day)
during gestation had a marked increase in progesterone levels in
plasma at GD 21 [18].

Concerning the prediction of anti-androgenic effect (e.g. nipple
retention), we would expect from the in vitro studies that procymi-
done and the three azole fungicides had the potential to induce
this effect. Procymidone was the most potent AR antagonist in vitro
and had also effects on nipple retention. Prochloraz was the most
potent testosterone inhibiting chemical in vitro and was found to
affect nipple retention in the present study and has previously
been shown to reduce male AGD in vivo, although higher doses
than those used in this project were necessary to induce this effect
[53]. All taken together, the in vitro studies gave good indications
of whether to expect in vivo anti-androgenic effects and effect on
gestation length. Overall, application of predictable in vitro assays
may contribute to faster and cheaper data generation for evalua-
tion of chemicals and a reduction of the number of experimental
animals that have to be used for risk assessment of chemicals.


### 4.3. Regulatory perspectives

In the present paper mixture effects of endocrine disrupting
pesticides have been shown, and as such the results support that
there is a need for risk assessment of the cumulative exposure to
chemicals. Below the mixture results are discussed in relation to
values used in regulatory risk assessment of single chemicals such

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="272" -->
<!-- PageHeader="U. Hass et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 34 (2012) 261-274" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 9 LOAELs for effect on gestation length (GL) in dams and nipple retention (NR) in male offspring after exposure to the single pesticides alone or in mixture.</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Pesticide</th>
<th colspan="2">Epoxiconazole</th>
<th colspan="2">Prochloraz</th>
<th colspan="2">Tebuconazole</th>
<th colspan="2">Procymidone</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Single</th>
<th>Mixture</th>
<th>Single</th>
<th>Mixture</th>
<th>Single</th>
<th>Mixture</th>
<th>Single</th>
<th>Mixture</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LOAEL-GL</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>2.5</td>
<td>&gt;35</td>
<td>5.8</td>
<td>&gt;50</td>
<td>8.3</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LOAEL-NR</td>
<td>&gt;15.0</td>
<td>1.3</td>
<td>5.8</td>
<td>2.9</td>
<td>8.3</td>
<td>4.2</td>
<td>4.2</td>
<td>4.2</td>
</tr>
</table>

Mancozeb and procymidone are not included for GL, and mancozeb is not included for nipple retention, as the pesticides did not affect these endpoints.


<table>
<caption>Table 10 ADI and derived no effect level (DNEL) in mg/kg bw/day for nipple retention in male offspring after exposure to the single pesticides alone or in mixture.</caption>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>ADIª</th>
<th>DNEL single</th>
<th>DNEL mix</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Epoxiconazole</td>
<td>0.008</td>
<td>0.050</td>
<td>0.004</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Prochloraz</td>
<td>0.010</td>
<td>0.019</td>
<td>0.010</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tebuconazole</td>
<td>0.030</td>
<td>0.028</td>
<td>0.014</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Procymidone</td>
<td>0.003</td>
<td>0.014</td>
<td>0.014</td>
</tr>
</table>

DNEL is calculated as LOAEL divided by 300. Mancozeb is not included as this pes-
ticide did not affect nipple retention.

a The ADI values for the four pesticides respectively are from EC (2008a), FAO
(2004), EC (2008b) and EFSA (2009).


as LOAELs, Derived No Effect Levels (DNELs) and Acceptable Daily
Intake (ADI).

The observed LOAELs for the pesticides singly and the doses of
the pesticides in the mixture at the mixture LOAEL were compared
for the endpoints gestation length and nipple retention (Table 9).
This was done only for, the relevant pesticides in the mixture, i.e.
those that singly caused effects on these endpoints. The main pur-
pose was to estimate whether mixture exposure would lead to
lower LOAELs than seen after single chemical exposure. For ges-
tation length, the doses of the single pesticides at the mixture
LOAEL were approximately 6 times lower than the LOAELs for the
pesticides given alone. This is an important finding, as it further
illustrates that mixture exposure leads to lower effect levels. For
nipple retention, several of doses of the single pesticides at the
mixture LOAEL were also lower than those for single chemical expo-
sure. However, for procymidone, there was no difference between
single and mixture LOAELs. Also, the differences between single
and mixture LOAEL for prochloraz and tebuconazole was only 2
times, and not 6 times like it was seen for gestation length. It must,
however, be kept in mind that the mixture caused effect on nip-
ple retention at the lowest mixture dose studied, i.e. the mixture
LOAELs may have become lower if lower doses of the mixture had
been studied. LOAELs determined experimentally depend on many
factors such as the selection of strain or species, the selection of
doses levels, sample size, the end points assessed and biological
variation. Thus some variability is to be expected among LOAELs
and may range from less than twofold up to a factor of 10 [57].
However, the LOAELs in this study are from studies in the same
strain of rats, the dose levels were carefully selecting based on the
previous results in our laboratory and the same endpoints were
assessed. Also, the results were quite reproducible for both the sin-
gle pesticides and the mixture when comparing the results from our
previous studies on the single pesticides, the range-finding study
with the mixture and the large mixture study where both mix-
ture doses and doses of the single pesticides were included ([23],
Supplemental Material Table X1). Thus, the variation in our study
LOAELs are clearly below a factor of 6 substantiating that this fac-
tor represents an increase beyond variation within and between
studies.

In Table 10, the Acceptable Daily Intakes (ADIs) are compared
to the DNELs for effect on nipple retention for each of the pesti-
cides. The DNEL was calculated from the LOAELs shown in Table 9
using the normally used uncertainty factors for deriving ADIs, i.e.
10 for extrapolation from animals to humans, 10 for different

sensitivity among humans and 3 for extrapolation from an effect
level to NOAEL. All of the DNELs for single chemical exposure to the
pesticides were higher or similar to the ADIs, reflecting that the cur-
rent ADI probably protects against the endocrine disrupting effect
of the studied pesticides, when the pesticides are evaluated chem-
ical by chemical. The mixture DNELs were, however, in most cases
lower than the ADIs. This was especially the case for epoxiconazole
and tebuconazole, where the DNELs based on the respective LOAELs
were half of the ADI. This indicates that the ADIs are not sufficiently
low to protect against the mixture effects of the pesticides studied
in this project. An exception was procymidone where the ADI was
lower than the mixture DNEL.

A survey of the dietary cumulative intake using the probabilis-
tic approach did not show a reason for concern in relation to mixed
exposure of Danish consumers to the five investigated pesticides
(Jensen et al. [58]). The risk assessment included an additional
uncertainty factor of 3 to allow room for human exposure to other
endocrine disrupting chemicals. However, it is somewhat uncer-
tain whether this factor is sufficient for covering the already known
endocrine disrupters and especially the thousands of chemicals that
are potential endocrine disrupters based on in vitro data and QSAR
modeling [59,60].


### 4.4. Conclusions

Combined developmental exposure to endocrine disrupting
pesticides at dose levels below NOAELs for the single pesticides
caused adverse effects on male sexual development and gestation
length and the mixture effects were well predicted by dose-
addition at low doses.

The in vitro data showed that the AR reporter gene assay and the
H295R steroidogenesis assay gave good indications of the observed
in vivo effects. As humans may be exposed to thousands of chem-
icals for which we still have no data about endocrine disrupting
properties, further in vitro studies as well as QSAR modeling are
important for progress in this area. In vitro data are especially
important for decisions on how to group endocrine disrupters for
cumulative risk assessment.

Comparisons of the DNELs for the mixture effect on nipple reten-
tion to the Acceptable daily intake (ADI) indicate that ADIs are
not sufficiently low to protect against the mixture effects of the
pesticides shown in this study. Thus, the results imply that risk
assessments based on NOAELs for single chemicals likely under-
estimate the risk and that there is a need for modification of risk
assessment procedures for pesticides, in order to take account of
mixture effects and the potentially serious impact of mixed expo-
sure on development and reproduction. One possibility is to allow
each pesticide to use only a fraction of the ADI, where the fraction
should depend on the number of relevant endocrine disrupters in
the specific exposure scenario. Another possibility is to base the
cumulative risk assessment on dose-additivity modeling. Observa-
tions of similar type of effect are recommended as the basis for
grouping chemicals for cumulative risk assessment as the results
of our study support findings from previous studies showing dose-
additive mixture effects of endocrine disrupters that induce similar
types of effects, but have dissimilar mechanisms of action. Last
but not least, it is recommended when considering cumulative

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="273" -->
<!-- PageHeader="U. Hass et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 34 (2012) 261-274" -->

risk assessment to include all kinds of chemicals e.g. pesticides,
industrial chemicals, environmental contaminants, as endocrine
disrupters exist within all of these chemicals classes and humans
may be exposed to several of them simultaneously.


## Funding

The research was financially supported by the Danish Environ-
mental Protection Agency's Pesticide Research Programme. In this
context the authors wish to acknowledge the Danish Environmen-
tal Protection Agency for funding the project.


## Acknowledgments

The presented research was made possible with the outstand-
ing contributions of laboratory technicians and assistants of whom
we wish to thank Lillian Sztuk, Dorte Lykkegaard Korsbech, Sarah
Grundt Simonsen, Ulla El-Baroudy, Vibeke Kjær, Birgitte Møller
Plesning, Heidi Letting, Bo Herbst, Eigil Frank, Kenneth René Worm
and Anne Ørngreen & Co from the animal facilities.

A steering committee for the project was established and
chaired by Jørn Kirkegaard, the Danish Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA). We would like to thank the members of the steer-
ing committee for their involvement throughout the project period.
Especially we want to thank the referees: Susanne Hougaard (Dan-
ish EPA), Karin Sørig Hougaard (National Research Centre for the
Working Environment), Grete Østergaard (Faculty of Health, Uni-
versity of Copenhagen) and Christian Ritz (Faculty of Life Sciences,
University of Copenhagen) for constructive comments during the
writing process.


## Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be
found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.reprotox.2012.05.090.


## References

[1] Giwercman A, Carlsen E, Keiding N, Skakkebaek NE. Evidence for increasing
incidence of abnormalities of the human testis: a review. Environmental Health
Perspectives 1993;101(Suppl. 2):65-71.

[2] Skakkebaek NE, Rajpert-De ME, Main KM. Testicular dysgenesis syndrome:
an increasingly common developmental disorder with environmental aspects.
Human Reproduction 2001;16:972-8.

[3] Blount BC, Silva MJ, Caudill SP, Needham LL, Pirkle JL, Sampson EJ, et al. Lev-
els of seven urinary phthalate metabolites in a human reference population.
Environmental Health Perspectives 2000; 108:979-82.

[4] Swan SH, Main KM, Liu F, Stewart SL, Kruse RL, Calafat AM, et al. Decrease
in anogenital distance among male infants with prenatal phthalate exposure.
Environmental Health Perspectives 2005;113:1056-61.

[5] European Parliament and Council. Regulation (EC) No. 396/2005 of the Euro-
pean Parliament and of the Council of 23 February 2005 on maximum residue
levels of pesticides in or on food and feed of plant and animal origin and
amending Council Directive 91/414/EEC. Official Journal of the European Union
2005;396:1-16.

[6] Hass U, Scholze M, Christiansen S, Dalgaard M, Vinggaard AM, Axelstad M,
et al. Combined exposure to anti-androgens exacerbates disruption of sexual
differentiation in the rat. Environmental Health Perspectives 2007;115(Suppl.
1):122-8.

[7] Metzdorff SB, Dalgaard M, Christiansen S, Axelstad M, Hass U, Kiersgaard MK,
et al. Dysgenesis and histological changes of genitals and perturbations of gene
expression in male rats after in utero exposure to antiandrogen mixtures. Tox-
icological Sciences 2007;98:87-98.

[8] Silva E, Rajapakse N, Kortenkamp A. Something from "nothing" - eight weak
estrogenic chemicals combined at concentrations below NOECs produce signif-
icant mixture effects. Environmental Science and Technology 2002;36:1751-6.

[9] Weidner IS, Moller H, Jensen TK, Skakkebaek NE. Cryptorchidism and hypospa-
dias in sons of gardeners and farmers. Environmental Health Perspectives
1998;106:793-6.

[10] Carbone P, Giordano F, Nori F, Mantovani A, Taruscio D, Lauria L, et al. The pos-
sible role of endocrine disrupting chemicals in the aetiology of cryptorchidism
and hypospadias: a population-based case-control study in rural Sicily. Inter-
national Journal of Andrology 2007;30:3-13.

[11] Kristensen P, Irgens LM, Andersen A, Bye AS, Sundheim L. Birth defects among
offspring of Norwegian farmers, 1967-1991. Epidemiology 1997;8:537-44.

[12] Fernandez MF, Olmos B, Granada A, Lopez-Espinosa MJ, Molina-Molina JM,
Fernandez JM, et al. Human exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals and
prenatal risk factors for cryptorchidism and hypospadias: a nested case-control
study. Environmental Health Perspectives 2007;115(Suppl. 1):8-14.

[13] Damgaard IN, Skakkebaek NE, Toppari J, Virtanen HE, Shen H, Schramm KW,
et al. Persistent pesticides in human breast milk and cryptorchidism. Environ-
mental Health Perspectives 2006; 114:1133-8.

[14] Pierik FH, Burdorf A, Deddens JA, Juttmann RE, Weber RF. Maternal and pater-
nal risk factors for cryptorchidism and hypospadias: a case-control study in
newborn boys. Environmental Health Perspectives 2004;112:1570-6.

[15] Rajapakse N, Silva E, Kortenkamp A. Combining xenoestrogens at levels below
individual no-observed effect concentrations dramatically enhances steroid
hormone action. Environmental Health Perspectives 2002;110:917-21.

[16] Ostby J, Kelce WR, Lambright C, Wolf CJ, Mann P, Gray Jr LE. The fungicide
procymidone alters sexual differentiation in the male rat by acting as an
androgen-receptor antagonist in vivo and in vitro. Toxicology and Industrial
Health 1999;15:80-93.

[17] Simard J, Luthy I, Guay J, Belanger A, Labrie F. Characteristics of interaction
of the antiandrogen flutamide with the androgen receptor in various target
tissues. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 1986;44:261-70.

[18] Taxvig C, Hass U, Axelstad M, Dalgaard M, Boberg J, Andeasen HR, et al.
Endocrine-disrupting activities in vivo of the fungicides tebuconazole and
epoxiconazole. Toxicological Sciences 2007; 100:464-73.

[19] Vinggaard AM, Nellemann C, Dalgaard M, Jorgensen EB, Andersen HR. Antian-
drogenic effects in vitro and in vivo of the fungicide prochloraz. Toxicological
Sciences 2002;69:344-53.

[20] Vinggaard AM, Christiansen S, Laier P, Poulsen ME, Breinholt V, Jarfelt K, et al.
Perinatal exposure to the fungicide prochloraz feminizes the male rat offspring.
Toxicological Sciences 2005;85:886-97.

[21] Axelstad M, Boberg J, Nellemann C, Kiersgaard M, Jacobsen PR, Christiansen S,
et al. Exposure to the widely used fungicide mancozeb causes thyroid hormone
disruption in rat dams but no behavioral effects in the offspring. Toxicological
Sciences 2011;120:439-46.

[22] Hurley PM. Mode of carcinogenic action of pesticides inducing thyroid fol-
licular cell tumors in rodents. Environmental Health Perspectives 1998;106:
437-45.

[23] Jacobsen PR, Christiansen S, Boberg J, Nellemann C, Hass U. Combined exposure
to endocrine disrupting pesticides impairs parturition, causes pup mortality
and affects sexual differentiation in rats. International Journal of Andrology
2010;33:434-42.

[24] Jacobsen PR, Axelstad M, Boberg J, Isling LK, Christiansen S, Mandrup KR, et al.
Persistent developmental toxicity in rat offspring after low dose exposure to
a mixture of endocrine disrupting pesticides. Reproductive Toxicology; Repro-
ductive Toxicology 2012;34:237-50.

[25] Herrmann SS, Poulsen ME, Jensen BH, Petersen A, Axelstad M, Jacobsen PR, et al.
Levels of four endocrine disrupting pesticides in serum from rat dams and their
pups following single or co-exposure; in preparation.

[26] Christiansen S, Scholze M, Dalgaard M, Vinggaard AM, Axelstad M, Kortenkamp
A, et al. Synergistic disruption of external male sex organ development
by a mixture of four antiandrogens. Environmental Health Perspectives
2009;117:1839-46.

[27] Loewe S, Muischnek H. Über kombinationswirkungen I. Mitteilung: hilfsmittel
der fragestellung. Naunyn-Schmiedebergs Archiv Fur Experimentelle Patholo-
gie Und Pharmacologie 1926;114:313-26.

[28] C.O.T., Risk assessment of mixtures of pesticides and similar substances, Com-
mittee on the Toxicity of Chemicals in Food. Consumer products and the
environment; 2002 [FSA/0691/0902].

[29] U.S.E.P.A. Guidance on cumulative risk assessment of pesticide chemicals that
have a common mechanism of toxicity. Office of Pesticide Programs, Washing-
ton, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 2002.

[30] U.S.EPA. Guidelines for the health risk assessment of chemical mixtures. Federal
Register 1986;51(185):34014-25.

[31] U.S.EPA. Supplementary guidance for conducting health risk assessment of
chemical mixtures. 630/R-00/002; 2000. Washington, DC.

[32] Wilkinson CF, Christoph GR, Julien E, Kelley JM, Kronenberg J, McCarthy J, et al.
Assessing the risks of exposure s to multiple chemicals with a common mech-
anism of toxicity: how to cumulate? Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology
2000;31:30-43.

[33] Bliss CI. The toxicity of poisons applied jointly. Annals of Applied Biology
1939;26:585-615.

[34] Gallavan RH, Holson JF, Stump DG, Knapp JF, Reynolds VL. Interpreting
the toxicologic significance of alterations in anogenital distance: potential
for confounding effects of progeny body weights. Reproductive Toxicology
1999;13:383-90.

[35] Liang KY, Zeger SL. Longitudinal data analysis using generalized linear models.
Biometrika 1986;73:13-22.

[36] Yan J, Fine JP. Estimating equations for association structures. Statistics in
Medicine 2004;23:859-80.

[37] Zeger SL, Liang KY. Longitudinal data analysis for discrete and continuous out-
comes. Biometrics 1986;42:121-30.

[38] Carey VJ. GEE: Generalized Estimation Equation solver. R package version
4.13-14. Ported to R by Thomas Lumley (versions 3.13, 4.4) and Brian Ripley
(Version 4.13); 2009.

[39] Efron B. The Jackknife, the bootstrap and other resampling. In Siam; 1982.

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="274" -->
<!-- PageHeader="U. Hass et al. / Reproductive Toxicology 34 (2012) 261-274" -->

[40] Scholze M, Bödeker W, Faust M, Backhaus T, Altenburger R, Grimme LH. A
general best-fit method for concentration-response curves and the estima-
tion of low-effect concentrations. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry
2001;20:448-57.

[41] Kjaerstad MB, Taxvig C, Nellemann C, Vinggaard AM, Andersen HR. Endocrine
disrupting effects in vitro of conazole antifungals used as pesticides and phar-
maceuticals. Reproductive Toxicology 2010;30:573-82.

[42] Hinkle PM, Kinsella PA. Thyroid hormone induction of an autocrine growth
factor secreted by pituitary tumor cells. Science 1986;234:1549-52.

[43] Taxvig C, Vinggaard AM, Hass U, Axelstad M, Boberg J, Hansen PR, et al. Do
parabens have the ability to interfere with steroidogenesis? Toxicological Sci-
ences 2008; 106:206-13.

[44] O'Brien J, Wilson I, Orton T, Pognan F. Investigation of the alamar blue
(resazurin) fluorescent dye for the assessment of mammalian cell cytotoxicity.
European Journal of Biochemistry 2000;267:5421-6.

[45] Hecker M, Hollert H, Cooper R, Vinggaard A, Akahori Y, Murphy M, et al.
Validation program of the H295R steroidogenesis assay: Phase 3. Final inter-
laboratory validation study. Environmental Science and Pollution Research
2011;18:503-15.

[46] Mosmann T. Rapid colorimetric assay for cellular growth and survival: applica-
tion to proliferation and cytotoxicity assays. Journal of Immunological Methods
1983;65(1-2):55-63.

[47] Noriega NC, Ostby J, Lambright C, Wilson VS, Gray Jr LE. Late gestational expo-
sure to the fungicide prochloraz delays the onset of parturition and causes
reproductive malformations in male but not female rat offspring. Biology of
Reproduction 2005;72:1324-35.

[48] Vinggaard AM, Hass U, Dalgaard M, Andersen HR, Bonefeld-Jorgensen
E, Christiansen S, et al. Prochloraz: an imidazole fungicide with multi-
ple mechanisms of action. International Journal of Andrology 2006;29:
186-92.

[49] Christenson L, Devoto L. Cholesterol transport and steroidogenesis by the cor-
pus luteum. Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2003;1:1-9.

[50] Moser VC, Barone Jr S, Smialowicz RJ, Harris MW, Davis BJ, Overstreet D,
et al. The effects of perinatal tebuconazole exposure on adult neurologi-
cal, immunological, and reproductive function in rats. Toxicological Sciences
2001;62:339-52.

[51] Wolf C, Lambright C, Mann P, Price M, Cooper RL, Ostby J, et al. Administra-
tion of potentially antiandrogenic pesticides (procymidone, linuron, iprodione,
chlozolinate, p,p'-DDE, and ketoconazole) and toxic substances (dibutyl-
and diethylhexyl phthalate, PCB 169, and ethane dimethane sulphonate)
during sexual differentiation produces diverse profiles of reproductive mal-
formations in the male rat. Toxicology and Industrial Health 1999;15:
94-118.

[52] Christiansen S, Scholze M, Axelstad M, Boberg J, Kortenkamp A, Hass U. Com-
bined exposure to anti-androgens causes markedly increased frequencies of
hypospadias in the rat. International Journal of Andrology 2008;31:241-8.

[53] Laier P, Metzdorff SB, Borch J, Hagen ML, Hass U, Christiansen S, et al.
Mechanisms of action underlying the antiandrogenic effects of the fungicide
prochloraz. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 2006;213:160-71.

[54] Rider CV, Furr J, Wilson VS, Gray LJ. A mixture of seven antiandrogens
induces reproductive malformations in rats. International Journal of Andrology
2008;31:249-62.

[55] Willingham E, Agras K, de Souza J, Konijeti R, Yucel S, Rickie W, et al. Steroid
receptors and mammalian penile development: an unexpected role for proges-
terone receptor? The Journal of Urology 2006; 176:728-33.

[56] Birkhøj M, Nellemann C, Jarfelt K, Jacobsen H, Andersen HR, Dalgaard M, et al.
The combined antiandrogenic effects of five commonly used pesticides. Toxi-
cology and Applied Pharmacology 2004;201:10-20.

[57] Janer G, Hakkert BC, Slob W, Vermeire T, Piersma AH. A retrospective analysis
of the two-generation study: what is the added value of the second generation?
Reproductive Toxicology 2007;24:97-102.

[58] Jensen BH, Petersen A, Christiansen S, Boberg S, Axelstad M, Herrmann S, et al.
Probabilistic assessment of the cumulative dietary exposure of the population
of Denmark to endocrine disrupting pesticides, in preparation.

[59] Jensen GE, Nikolov NG, Wedebye EB, Ringsted T, Niemelä JR. QSAR models for
anti-androgenic effect - a preliminary study. SAR and QSAR in Environmental
Research 2011;22:35-49.

[60] Vinggaard AM, Niemelä JR, Wedebye EB, Jensen GE. Screening of 397
chemicals and development of a quantitative structure activity relationship
model for androgen receptor antagonism. Chemical Research in Toxicology
2008;21:813-23.

[61] EC, European Commission. Review report for the active substance epoxicona-
zole. Commission working document, draft. SANCO/136/08-rev. 1, July 9th
2008, European Commission Health & Consumers Directorate-General, 2008.

[62] FAO, Pesticide residues in food. Report of the Joint Meeting of the FAO Panel of
Experts on Pesticide Residues in Food and the Environment and the WHO Core
Assessment Group on Pesticide Residues. Rome, Italy, 20-29 September 2004.
FAO Plant production and Protection Paper 178. WHO and Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, 2004.

[63] EC, European Commission. Review report for the active substance tebucona-
zole. Commission working document, draft. SANCO/171/08-rev. 1, September
9th 2008, European Commission Health & Consumers Directorate-General,
2008.

[64] EFSA, European Food Safety Authority. MRLs of concern for the active sub-
stance procymidone, taking into account revised toxicological reference values.
Reasoned opinion of EFSA. EFSA Scientific Report 227, 2009;1-26.
