<!-- PageHeader="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 74:185-195 (2005)" -->
<!-- PageHeader="@ 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc." -->


# Original Article


# Craniofacial and Axial Skeletal Defects Induced by the Fungicide Triadimefon in the Mouse

Elena Menegola,* Maria Luisa Broccia, Francesca Di Renzo, Valentina Massa and Erminio Giavini
Department of Biology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy

BACKGROUND: Triadimefon is an antifungal derived from triazole. In in vitro whole-rodent embryo cultures, triazole-
derivatives showed specific teratogenic effects at the branchial apparatus. The aim of the present work was to test in vivo
triadimefon (FON), in order to verify a relationship between triazole exposure, embryonic abnormalities, and/or fetal
malformations. METHODS: Pregnant CD-1 mice were treated with 0-300 mg/kg FON by gavage on day 8 post coitum
(p.c.) at 10:00 AM, and sacrificed on day 8 p.c. at 1:00 PM, on day 9 p.c. at 10:00 AM, on day 10 p.c. at 10:00 AM, and at term
of gestation (day 18 p.c.). At midgestation, the embryos were processed for specific immunostainings to visualize the
hindbrain segmentation (day 8 p.c.) and the neural crest cell migration (days 8 and 9 p.c.). Fetuses explanted at term were
all processed for skeletal examination after double-staining of osseous and cartilaginous tissues. RESULTS: At
midgestation, the immunostaining of rhombomeres 3 and 5 showed a light scattering of the immunostained areas; the
neural crest cell migration was unaffected, but their localization at the branchial arch level was abnormal. At term,
several severe malformations were observed at the craniofacial and at the axial skeletal level. Ectopic cartilage was
observed at the upper jaw. CONCLUSIONS: Triadimefon is teratogenic. The observed craniofacial malformations could
be explained by an alteration of the rhombomeric organization and neural crest migration to the branchial arches; the
axial abnormalities could be explained by the abnormal segmental identity specification. Birth Defects Res B 74:185-195,
2005. C 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

Key words: triazole; teratogenesis; homeotic respecification; birth
defects


## INTRODUCTION

Triazole-derivatives constitute a class of substances
containing one or two triazole groups in their molecular
formula. Classified as antifungals, they are widely used
as agrochemicals against mildews and rusts of cereal
grains, fruits, vegetables, and ornamentals, or clinically
against topical or disseminated candidiasis and cocci-
dioidal meningitis. These compounds inhibit fungal
proliferation by their interference with steroid biosynth-
esis and fungal cell-wall formation mediated by P450
enzymes (Vanden Bossche et al., 1984).

Conventional teratological in vivo studies showed
that these substances are slightly teratogenic after daily
oral administration during the whole embryogenic
period both in rats and in rabbits. Teratogenic effects,
in fact, occur only at maternotoxic dose levels. Interest-
ingly, however, the observed malformations are common
to all tested triazoles (agrochemicals: triadimefon
[FON], triadimenol, flusilazole, bitertanol, cyprocona-
zole; clinical drugs: fluconazole, itraconazole), and are
described as cleft palate (Machemer, 1976, 1977; Korte
and Ostenburg, 1980; FAO, 1982, 1985a, 1985b, 1989;
Unger et al., 1982; Becker et al., 1986; Tachibana et al.,
1987; Van Cauteren et al., 1987; Vergieva, 1990; Machera,
1995).

Even if no data are available on the effect of
agrochemical triazoles on human pregnancy, the effect
of the clinical drug fluconazole on newborns has been
documented, with contrasting results. In fact, while
prospective studies showed that the single use of 50-
150 mg/kg of fluconazole during the first trimester of
pregnancy is not related to an increased teratological
risk, case-reports, referring to long-term or high-dose
(400-800 mg/day) maternal fluconazole therapy, re-
ported craniofacial and limb abnormalities in newborns
(Lee et al., 1992; Mastroiacovo et al., 1996; Pursley et al.,
1996; Wiesinger et al., 1996; Aleck and Bartley, 1997;
Sanchez and Moya, 1998).

Recently, postimplantation rodent embryos cultured in
vitro from the embryonic stage corresponding to 1-3
somites (rat) or 8-10 somites (mouse) for 48 hours in
presence of some triazoles (triadimefon, triadimenol,
flusilazole, and fluconazole for rats; fluconazole for mice)

Grant sponsor: Italian Ministry of University and Research; Grant number:
PRIN 2004.

*Correspondence to: Elena Menegola, Department of Biology, University
of Milan, 20133 Milan, Italy.

E-mail: elena.menegola@unimi.it

Received 26 October 2004; Accepted 21 January 2005

Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)
DOI: 10.1002/bdrb.20035

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="186" -->
<!-- PageHeader="MENEGOLA ET AL." -->

showed severe and specific alterations at the branchial
apparatus level (reduction and fusion of the first and
second branchial arches, and agenesis of the second
branchial arch) (Tiboni, 1993; Menegola et al., 2000,
2001a), related to abnormal rhombencephalic organiza-
tion (rhombencephalic segments 3 and 5 reduced and
scattered after immunostaining) (Menegola et al., 2003,
2004), to abnormal neural crest cell migration from the
rhombencephalon to the branchial arches (after immu-
nostaining, neural crest cells converged in a unique flow
instead of forming three separate migrating streams as
observed in controls) (Menegola et al., 2003, 2004), and to
the formation of abnormal ectomesenchymal tissue from
migrated neural crest cells (after 48 hours of culture, the
neural crest cells reached the branchial apparatus but
were unable to condense) (Menegola et al., 2003, 2004). In
mammalian embryos, the pharyngeal ectomesenchyme,
originated by the cranial neural crest cells that migrated
into the branchial arches, gives rise to the craniofacial
bones and to the ossicles of the middle ear (Johnston
et al., 1985) (Fig. 1).

The aim of the present work was to study, using an
unconventional in vivo protocol (single oral administra-
tion instead of daily treatment during the whole
embryogenic period), the teratogenic potential in mice
of one triazole derivative, FON, as representative of the
whole chemical family. To compare the results with data
previously obtained in vitro, the treatment time (day 8
post coitum [p.c.], 10:00 AM) was chosen considering the
embryonic stage (5-13 somites, as established by a
previous staging test), and dams were sacrificed at
midgestation (at times corresponding to the embryonic
stages comparable to those analyzed during the in vitro
protocols) or at term.

As branchial arch ectomesenchyme produces exqui-
sitely facial skeletal structures, fetuses explanted at term
were all processed for skeletal analysis.


## MATERIALS AND METHODS

Virgin CD-1 mice (Charles-River, Calco, Italy), housed
in a thermostatically maintained room (T=22+2℃;


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 1. Scheme showing the skeletal structures originating from the first and the second branchial arches. Sq: squamosal.</figcaption>

Neural
crest

Neural crest-
mesoderm
interface

Neural crest
mesenchyme

Mesodermal
mesenchyme

Myelen-
cephalon

Mesencephalon

Pharynx

Branchial arches 3-6
Hyoid arch
Mandibular arch

Diencephalon

Stomodeum

Sphenoid
Lacrimal

Parietal

Frontal

Nasal

Jugal

Incus

Sq

Maxilla

Malleus

Premaxilla

2

Petrosus

Mandible

Occipitals

Hyoids
Laryngeals

1

3

Stapes

Cranio-facial derivatives

Middle ear structures

</figure>


<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 74:185-195, 2005" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2005, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.20035 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="TRIADIMEFON-INDUCED SKELETAL DEFECTS" -->
<!-- PageNumber="187" -->

relative humidity 55+5%; light cycle from 7:00 AM to 7:00
PM) with food (Italiana Mangimi, Italy) and tap water ad
libitum, were caged overnight with males of proven
fertility. The day of the vaginal plug was considered as
GD 0. Pregnant mice were orally treated by gavage with
0 or 300 mg/kg FON (gift of Bayer, Italy; dissolved in a
solution containing 10% acetone in corn oil) on day 8 p.c.
at 10:00 AM. The treatment time was selected on the basis
of a previous staging test showing that at this time the
embryonic stage ranges from 5 to 13 somites. The FON
dose level was selected on the basis of a previous range
finding test, showing 300 mg/kg as the highest dose well
tolerated by this strain of mice. This unconventional
protocol was chosen to compare the results obtained in in
vitro postimplantation whole embryo culture with an in
vivo exposure of embryos at similar developmental
stages. As it was not a proposal of this study to
individuate a no observed effect level (NOEL) for risk
assessment, but just to demonstrate the intrinsic terato-
genic properties of FON as representative of a class of
triazoles, the highest well tolerated dose level was
selected, on the basis of a previous range finding test
on FON 300-400-500 mg/kg.


## Analysis at Midgestation

Females were sacrificed by CO2 asphyxia at midgesta-
tion in order to evaluate their rhombencephalic organiza-
tion, neural crest cell migration into the branchial arches,
and branchial arch ectomesenchymal compaction.

Females were sacrificed on day 8 p.c. at 1:00 PM to
evaluate by immunostaining rhombomeres 3, 4, and 5, as
described by White et al. (2000). For this purpose, only
embryos at the 8-13 somite stage were chosen for
staining. The primary antibodies used were an anti-Krox
20 protein antibody to mark rhombomeres 3 and 5 and an
anti-Hox-b1 protein antibody to mark rhombomere 4.
The procedures of whole mount immunostaining are
described in Table 1.

To evaluate neural crest cell migration and ectome-
senchyme compaction, neural crest cells were immuno-
localized according to the method described by Wei et al.
(1999) by the use of an anticellular retinoic acid binding
protein (anti-CRABP) antibody on embryos explanted on
day 8 p.c. at 1:00 PM (embryonic stage 8-18 somites) and

on day 9 p.c. at 10:00 AM (embryonic stage 23-26
somites). The procedures of whole-mount immunostain-
ing are described in Table 1. After staining, embryos
were analyzed under a dissecting microscope and
photographed.


## Analysis at Term

After dam sacrifice by CO2 asphyxia, the entire uterine
content was weighed and total implantation, live and
dead fetuses, early and late resorptions were recorded.
The postimplantation loss index [(total implantation -
live fetuses/total implantation) × 100] was calculated.
Live fetuses were then explanted from the uterus,
morphologically examined, and weighed. All the ex-
planted fetuses were processed for the double skeletal
staining of bone and cartilage, following the method
described by Kimmel and Trammell (1981), partially
modified as previously described (Menegola et al.,
2001b). The osseous and cartilaginous tissues were
stained using respectively alizarin red and alcian blue
reagents. After staining, fetuses were analyzed under a
dissecting microscope and the abnormalities were
recorded.


## Statistical Analysis

Statistical analysis was performed with the Student's t-
test and the chi-square test. The level of significance was
set at p<0.05.


## RESULTS Analysis at Midgestation

A total of 35 embryos from controls (5 embryos/dam)
and of 55 embryos (5 embryos/dam) from females
treated with 300 mg/kg FON, all with a stage ranging
from 8 to 13 somites, were explanted at day 8 p.c. (1:00
PM) and immunostained with anti-Krox 20 protein
antibody to visualize rhombomeres 3 and 5 (r3, r5). In
control embryos, immunostaining revealed two dark
stripes with well-defined borders. In embryos explanted
from FON-treated dams, the immunostained regions
appeared reduced in height and scattered (Fig. 2a and b).


<table>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">Table 1 Immunostaining Procedures</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Stained structures</th>
<th>Fixation</th>
<th>Primary antibody</th>
<th>Secondary antibody</th>
<th>Visualization</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="4">Rhombomere 4 Rhombomeres 3, 5</td>
<td>Dent's fixative (DMSO :- methanol 1:4)</td>
<td>Rabbit anti-Hox-b1 protein (Eurogentec):PBS 1:250</td>
<td>Goat anti-rabbit -IgG-per- oxidase (Boerhinger):PBS 1:40</td>
<td rowspan="2">4-Cl-1-naphtol (Sigma) 0.25% in ethanol 40% + oxygen peroxide 0.006%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Overnight -20℃</td>
<td>Three days 4℃</td>
<td>Overnight 4℃</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dent's fixative (DMSO :- methanol 1:4)</td>
<td>Rabbit anti-Krox-20 pro- tein (Eurogentec):PBS 1:250</td>
<td rowspan="2">Goat anti-rabbit -IgG-per- oxidase (Boerhinger):PBS 1:40 Overnight 4℃</td>
<td rowspan="2">4-Cl-1-naphtol (Sigma) 0.25% in ethanol 40% + oxygen peroxide 0.006%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Overnight -20℃</td>
<td>Three days 4℃</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">Neural crest cells</td>
<td>Dent's fixative (DMSO :- methanol 1:4)</td>
<td>Mouse anti-CRABP (ABR): PBS 1:250</td>
<td>Goat anti-mouse -IgG-per- oxidase (Boerhinger):PBS 1:40</td>
<td rowspan="2">4-Cl-1-naphtol (Sigma) 0.25% in ethanol 40% + oxygen peroxide 0.006%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Overnight -20°℃</td>
<td>Three days 4℃</td>
<td>Overnight 4℃</td>
</tr>
</table>

DMSO = dimethylsulfide; PBS = phosphate saline buffer; IgG = immunoglobulin G.

Eurogentec, Covance Barkeley, Richmond, CA; Boerhinger, Mannheim, Germany; Sigma, St. Louis, MO; ABR, Golden, CO.


<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 74:185-195, 2005" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2005, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.20035 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="188" -->
<!-- PageHeader="MENEGOLA ET AL." -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 2. a,b: Dorsal view of the hindbrain of day 10 p.c. embryos immunostained with the antibody anti-Krox-20 protein showing the structure of rhombomeres 3 and 5. (20 x ) a: Control. b: Embryo explanted from a FON 300 mg/kg treated dam. Note that the immunostained regions appear light scattered and reduced in height. c-f: Lateral view of day 10 p.c. (15 x ; c,d) and day 11 p.c. (12 x ; e,f) embryos immunostained with an anti-CRABP antibody. Three separate flow (arrows) of migrating neural crest cells are visible from the hindbrain (from the regions corresponding to rhombomeres 2, 4, and 6) to the branchial region (to the morphogenic region of the first, second, and posterior branchial arches, respectively) both in the control (c) and in an embryos explanted from a FON 300 mg/kg treated dam (d). After migration, however, the ectomesenchyme derived from the migrated neural crest cells (dark tissue in the circled area) appears abnormally distributed in embryos explanted from the FON group dams (f) in comparison to controls (e).</figcaption>

a

b

r 3

r 5

r3

r 5

c

d

e

f

</figure>


<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 74:185-195, 2005" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2005, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.20035 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="189" -->
<!-- PageHeader="TRIADIMEFON-INDUCED SKELETAL DEFECTS" -->

When immunostained with the antibody anti-Hox-b1
protein, on the contrary, the 35 control and 55 FON
embryos, explanted from the same litters used for Krox-
20 analysis, showed a similar pattern: a unique, compact,
dark stripe with well-defined borders.

To visualize neural crest cell migration from the
rhombencephalon to the branchial arches, 35 and 55
embryos explanted from seven controls and from 11
FON-treated dams at day 8 p.c. (1:00 PM), respectively,
and 25 and 25 embryos explanted from five controls and
from 5 FON-treated dams at day 9 p.c. (10:00 AM),
respectively, were immunostained with antibody anti-
CRABP. In the younger embryos (8-18 somites), both in
controls and in FON-exposed conceptuses, three very
distinct immunostained cell flows, directed from the
rhombencephalon to the branchial arches, were ob-
served. No apparent differences were observed between
the two groups (Fig. 2c and d). Control embryos with a
stage ranging from 23 to 26 somites showed three distinct
and very condensed ectomesenchymal areas at the first
and the second branchial arches and at the region
originating at the more caudal branchial arches. Embryos
of the same developmental stage explanted from FON-
treated dams showed apparently normal-shaped bran-
chial arches. However, CRABP immunostaining revealed
a clear abnormal compaction of neural crest cells, which
had migrated into the branchial apparatus (Fig. 2e and f).


### Analysis at Term

As shown in Table 2, the postimplantation loss index
and the mean fetal weight were similar to those of the
control group.


<table>
<caption>Table 2 Litter Parameters at Term of Pregnancy</caption>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Control</th>
<th>FON 300 mg/kg</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Mated females</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>12</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Females with implantations</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Females with live fetuses</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Implantations</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>62</td>
<td>129</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>M±SD</td>
<td>12.40±1.52</td>
<td>14.33±2.12</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Live fetuses</td>
<td>57</td>
<td>125</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>11.40±1.95</td>
<td>13.88±2.42</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>M±SD</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Postimplantation loss (%)</td>
<td>8.06</td>
<td>2.63</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetal weight (M+SD)</td>
<td>1.42±0.05</td>
<td>1.33±0.07</td>
</tr>
</table>


<table>
<caption>Table 3 External Abnormalities (%)</caption>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>CON</th>
<th>FON 300 mg/kg</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total litters</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total examined fetuses</td>
<td>54</td>
<td>121</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetuses with external defects</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>25.62ª</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cleft palate</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>23.14</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Micrognathia</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>1.65</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Macrognathia</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.83</td>
</tr>
</table>

ªp<0.01 vs. Control.


<table>
<caption>Table 4 Skeletal Abnormalities Detected at the Craniofacial Level (%)</caption>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>CON</th>
<th>300 mg/kg FON</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total litters</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total examined fetuses</td>
<td>54</td>
<td>121</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetuses with craniofacial defects</td>
<td>9.3</td>
<td>86.8ª</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fusions</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ear ossicles</td>
<td></td>
<td>47.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tympanic ring-ear ossicles</td>
<td></td>
<td>23.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosal-tympanic ring</td>
<td></td>
<td>9.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosal-zygomatic</td>
<td></td>
<td>6.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tympanic ring-alisphenoid</td>
<td></td>
<td>5.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tympanic ring-ear ossicles-Meckel's</td>
<td></td>
<td>4.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>cartilage</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosal-Meckel's cartilage</td>
<td></td>
<td>3.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tympanic ring-pterygoid</td>
<td></td>
<td>3.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosal-pterygoid</td>
<td></td>
<td>2.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosal-styloid process</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosal-tympanic ring-pterygoid</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tympanic ring-Meckel's cartilage</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosal-alisphenoid</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Basioccipital-basisphenoid</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosal-ear ossicles</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosal-alisphenoid-pterygoid</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tympanic ring-alisphenoid-pterygoid</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Abnormal shape</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tympanic ring</td>
<td></td>
<td>81.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Squamosal</td>
<td></td>
<td>52.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Zygomatic</td>
<td></td>
<td>42.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Styloid process</td>
<td></td>
<td>29.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Alisphenoid</td>
<td></td>
<td>14.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pterygoid</td>
<td></td>
<td>9.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Mandible</td>
<td></td>
<td>2.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Palatine</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Agenesis</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Styloid process</td>
<td></td>
<td>10.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Rostral process of the Meckel's cartilage</td>
<td>9.3</td>
<td>6.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tympanic ring</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ectopic cartilage</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Upper jaw</td>
<td></td>
<td>76.9</td>
</tr>
</table>

ªp<0.01 vs. Control.


A total of 26% of FON-exposed fetuses showed
external malformations (Table 3). In particular, cleft
palate (28 cases), macrognathia (1 case), and micro-
gnathia (2 cases) were observed. No abnormal fetuses
were observed from controls.

As far as the skeletal analysis is concerned, after
double-staining for bone and cartilage, 9% of control
fetuses and 87% of FON-exposed fetuses showed
craniofacial defects (Table 4). The observed malforma-
tions were all at the level of skeletal structures derived
from the first and second branchial arches (Fig. 1; Table 4)
and were: fusion, agenesis, and abnormal shape of
osseous or cartilaginous elements of the jaw, of the basal
and lateral cranial structures, and of the middle ear
ossicles (Fig. 3).

Interestingly, axial defects were recorded in 87% of
fetuses explanted from FON-treated dams (Table 5). The
abnormalities were fusions, duplications, or morpholo-
gical transformations of axial segments. The analysis of
phenotypes revealed that all controls showed the typical
axial formula with 7 cervical, 13 thoracic (with ribs, of

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 74:185-195, 2005" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2005, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.20035 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="190" -->
<!-- PageHeader="MENEGOLA ET AL." -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 3. Lateral view of the skull of fetuses explanted from a controls (a,c,e) and from FON 300 mg/kg treated dams (b,d,f), stained using the double staining method for bone (red) and cartilage (blue). a,b: 8 x ; c,d: 20 x ; e,f: 25 x . The following structures are visible: n, nasal; f, frontal; p, parietal; ip, interparietal; so, supraoccipital; eo, exoccipital; pm, premaxilla; mx, maxilla; z, zygomatic; s, squamosal (the arrows show the retrotympanic process); mn, mandible; o, otic capsule; t, tympanic ring; and st, styloid process. Arrowheads show the rostral and distal processes of the Meckel's cartilage. Note in b and f the abnormal shape of the retrotympanic process, and in b and d the ectopic cartilage visible at the upper jaw (*) in FON 300 group explanted fetuses. In e, note the normal structures of the ear ossicles malleus (m), incus (i), and stapes (s) and of the distal region of the Meckel's cartilage (arrowhead), completely fused together in f in the FON 300 group fetus (#), where the tympanic ring agenesis and the abnormal and reduced styloid process is also visible.</figcaption>

a

f

P

ip

b

n

S
K

So

0

**

pm mx

Z

1

eo

mn

t

c

d

\*

**

e

f

V

1

m

S

\#

st

st

t

</figure>


those only seven reached the sternum in 86% of the cases,
eight reached the sternum in 14% of the cases), 6 lumbar,
5 sacral, and a number of caudal vertebrae (Figs. 4a-c,
5a-c). In 40% of fetuses explanted from FON-treated
dams, the phenotype was compatible with an anterior
homeotic transformation (eight ribs reaching the sternum
associated with a lumbar rib and in some cases to a
lumbar morphology of the first and second sacral
vertebrae) (Fig. 4d-f). In addition, 28% of the fetuses
showed duplication of thoracic segments and, as a
consequence, the axial formula was: 7 cervical, 14
thoracic, 6 lumbar, 5 sacral, and a number of caudal
(Fig. 5d-f).

Ectopic cartilage at the level of the upper jaw, never
recorded in controls, was observed in 77% of FON-
exposed fetuses (Fig. 3b and d).


## DISCUSSION

Single oral administration of 300 mg/kg FON on day 8
p.c. (10:00 AM, embryonic stage 5-13 somites) was highly
teratogenic in mice. Fetuses explanted at term from FON-
treated dams were, in fact, characterized by external
(26% cleft palate) as well as skeletal (96%, craniofacial
and axial, observed after double-staining for bone and
cartilage) malformations. Previously published data on

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 74:185-195, 2005" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2005, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.20035 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="191" -->
<!-- PageHeader="TRIADIMEFON-INDUCED SKELETAL DEFECTS" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 5 Skeletal Abnormalities Detected at the Axial Level (%)</caption>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>CON</th>
<th>300 mg/kg FON</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total litters</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total examined fetuses</td>
<td>54</td>
<td>121</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetuses with axial defects</td>
<td>35.0</td>
<td>87.0ª</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Homeotic transformation of thoracic segments+lumbar rib</td>
<td>9.3</td>
<td>43.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cervical rib</td>
<td>16.7</td>
<td>21.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Asymmetric sternum</td>
<td>5.6</td>
<td>19.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Duplication of thoracic segments</td>
<td></td>
<td>17.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Lumbar rib</td>
<td>31.5</td>
<td>11.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>8° rib reaching the sternum</td>
<td>3.7</td>
<td>6.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Homeotic transformation of thoracic segments</td>
<td></td>
<td>5.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>6° lumbar vertebra morphologically</td>
<td></td>
<td>5.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>transformed as sacral</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>8° rib near the sternum</td>
<td>1.9</td>
<td>4.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1º sacral vertebra morphologically</td>
<td></td>
<td>4.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>transformed as lumbar</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>2° sacral vertebra morphologically</td>
<td></td>
<td>4.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>transformed as the 1º</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Extra emi-sternebra without duplication</td>
<td></td>
<td>2.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fusions between ribs</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fusions between cervical vertebrae</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>7° rib far from the sternum</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.8</td>
</tr>
</table>

ªp<0.01 vs. Control.


rat and rabbit teratogenesis of a number of triazole
derivatives, administered daily during the whole em-
bryogenic period, showed cleft palate as the typical
malformation but, as it significantly occurred only at
maternotoxic dose levels, it was related to maternal
imbalance instead of a direct chemical effect (Machemer,
1976, 1977; Korte and Ostenburg, 1980; FAO, 1982, 1985a,
1985b, 1989; Unger et al., 1982; Becker et al., 1986; Van
Cauteren et al., 1987; Tachibana et al., 1987; Vergieva,
1990; Machera, 1995). For this reason, nowadays, both
clinical and agrochemical triazole derivatives are com-
monly used against maternal infections and by pregnant
workers.

The data obtained from this present work, using an
unconventional nonmaternotoxic protocol, strictly sug-
gest that the effects of the triazole FON on mice are not
mediated by maternotoxicity. The aim of the present
work was to determine the teratogenic potential of FON,
as representative of the triazole family, and to relate the
abnormalities elicited in vivo with the embryonic
alterations previously described after in vitro exposure
of postimplantation rat and mouse embryos to a number
of triazoles (FON, triadimenol, flusilazole, fluconazole)
(Tiboni, 1993; Menegola et al., 2000, 2001a, 2003, 2004).
For this reason, some control and FON-treated females
were sacrificed at midgestation and embryos were
processed for immunolocalization of structures consid-
ered targets after in vitro analysis. Abnormal rhomben-
cephalic organization at the level of rhombomeres 3 and
5, abnormal neural crest cell migration from hindbrain to
the branchial arches, abnormal branchial arch ectome-
senchyme compaction, and abnormal branchial arch
morphology have been described after rat embryo in
vitro exposure to fluconazole 500 uM (Menegola et al.,

2003, 2004) or to FON 250 µM, triadimenol 125 uM, or
flusilazole 25 µM (Di Renzo et al., 2003). In the present
study, embryos explanted at midgestation from FON-
treated dams showed less severe but similar alterations
at the level of the same target structures. In particular,
abnormal organization of rhombomeres 3 and 5 (reduced
in height and scattered, as they appeared after immu-
nostaining of the characterizing protein Krox 20) and
abnormal ectomesenchymal compaction at the level of
the branchial arches (as observed after CRABP immu-
nostaining) were detected. The correspondence between
in vivo and in vitro results suggests that the in vitro
model, at least for this class of substances, is adequate to
determine the pathogenic pathway and predictive of
teratogenic effects.

On the basis of the in vitro effects of triazoles on
branchial arch morphology, craniofacial alterations were
expected after in vivo exposure. Craniofacial morpho-
genesis is a complex phenomenon based on the inter-
action between different structures derived from
neurocranial and branchial elements. The craniofacial
and middle ear bones derived from the first and second
branchial arch ectomesenchyme are summarized in
Figure 1. As expected, a large number of the fetuses
explanted at term from FON-treated dams were abnor-
mal, after double-staining for bone and cartilage,
specifically at the level of the craniofacial structures
originating from the branchial ectomesenchyme (pala-
tine, basisphenoid, alisphenoid, pterygoid, squamosal,
zygomatic, maxilla, mandible, Meckel's cartilage, tym-
panic ring, and ear ossicles). The observed malforma-
tions were: abnormal shape, fusions, and agenesis. In
addition to these abnormalities, ectopic cartilage was
frequently observed at the level of the upper jaw. In
primitive vertebrates, the upper jaw consists of the
endoskeletal palatoquadrate cartilage originating from a
part of the first branchial arch. The palatoquadrate, fully
functional as jaw only in sharks, changes its functions in
other vertebrates and, in mammals, becomes the incus of
the middle ear and the alisphenoid bone, while the upper
jaw is constituted by the dermal elements of premaxilla
and maxilla. Craniofacial abnormalities were reported in
the literature after exposure to different chemicals (Kay,
1987; Sulik et al., 1988; Rogers et al., 2004). On the
contrary, ectopic upper jaw cartilage was only described
on mouse embryos exposed to teratogenic dosages of
retinoic acid (Morriss-Kay, 1993), a known morphogen
acting during a number of embryogenic processes
(gastrulation, hindbrain segmentation, axial segmenta-
tion, limb organization, and heart and great vessel
formation), switching on the expression of genes of the
Hox family (Morriss-Kay et al., 1991; Gudas, 1994;
Clagett-Dame and Plum, 1997). After retinoic acid
exposure, the ectopic cartilage was described as a
duplication of the Meckel's cartilage (the second cartila-
ginous element derived from the first branchial arch,
implied in the formation of the lower jaw in primitive
vertebrates, encased in the dermal bone dentary in
mammals). In fetuses exposed to retinoic acid, the
duplicated Meckel's cartilage was completely displaced
from the mandibular to the maxillary region (Morriss-
Kay, 1993).

Unexpectedly, 87% of the fetuses explanted from FON-
treated females also showed axial skeletal abnormalities,
classified as fusions of vertebrae or ribs, duplications of

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 74:185-195, 2005" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2005, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.20035 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="192" -->
<!-- PageHeader="MENEGOLA ET AL." -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 4. a-c: Axial structure of a control fetus, as detected after the double staining method for bone (red) and cartilage (blue). a: Dorsal view of the cervical, thoracic and lumbar regions, characterized respectively by 7 (C1-C7), 13 (T1-T13), and 6 (L1-L6) vertebrae. Thoracic vertebrae articulate ribs, seven (1-7) reaching the sternum and inducing the formation of six sternebrae (I-VI) (8 x ). b: Isolated sternum of a control fetus. Note the rib insertion and the structure of the sternebrae (12.5 x ). c: Ventral view of the sacral region, characterized by five vertebrae (S1-S5) reaching the iliac crest (ic). Note the characteristic shape of the sacral transverse processes (arrow) in comparison to the lumbar ones (arrowhead) (16 x ). d-f: Morphological appearance of the axial structures in a FON group fetus showing anterior homeotic transformation. A total of 13 thoracic segments are visible (8 x ; d), the eighth showing the morphology of the seventh (the rib reaching the sternum between sternebrae V and VI, as is also well visible in e; 12.5 x ). Note the lumbar rib (arrowhead; d) and the partial homeotic anterior transformation of the first sacral vertebra, showing the left transverse process with the typical morphology of the lumbar ones (arrow), well visible in f (16 x ).</figcaption>

a

C1

I

1

II

TV

2

T1

C7

III

VI

TT

4

3

b

5

7

6

I

C

II

2

L6

3

1

T13

III

S1

ic

L1

TV

4

TT

5

6

VI

7

6

S5

d

T1

e

V

VI

T8

I

f

II

T13

III

3

X

L1

IT

4

4

A

TT

6

8

K

VI

</figure>


<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 74:185-195, 2005" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2005, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.20035 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="TRIADIMEFON-INDUCED SKELETAL DEFECTS" -->
<!-- PageNumber="193" -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Fig. 5. a-c: Axial structure of a control fetus, as detected after the double-staining method for bone (red) and cartilage (blue). a: Dorsal view of the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar regions, characterized by 7 (C1-C7), 13 (T1-T13), and 6 (L1-L6) vertebrae, respectively. Thoracic vertebrae articulate ribs, seven (1-7) reaching the sternum and inducing the formation of six sternebrae (I-VI) (8 x ). b: Lateral view of some cervical and thoracic vertebrae. Note the typical spine characterizing the second thoracic vertebra (arrow) (18 x). c: Isolated sternum of a control fetus. Note the rib insertion and the structure of the sternebrae (12.5 x ). d-f: Morphological appearance of the axial structures in a FON group fetus showing thoracic duplication. A total of 14 thoracic segments are detectable (8 x ; d), followed by 6 normal lumbar and 5 normal sacral vertebrae. The lateral view of some thoracic vertebrae shows the duplication of the second thoracic vertebra (arrow; e) (18 x ). At the sternal level (12.5 x ; f) an extra sternebra (2bis) is induced.</figcaption>

a

I

1

II

III

2

T1

V

TV7

3

b

4

C

VI

5

I

76

II

2

C7

T13

III

3

L1

T2

TV7

4

V

3

VI

7

L6 0

d

1

II

T1

Ilbis 2

T2bis

I

III

B

2bis

V

4

f

VI

e

7

0

I

II

4

T13

T2

L1

T2bis

Ilbis

2bis

A

III

3

\+

IV

4

L6

V

5

6

VI

7

</figure>


axial segments, or anterior morphological homeotic
transformations of axial segments. Similar axial altera-
tions have been described in the literature after treatment
of pregnant mice and rats to chemicals such as retinoic

acid and valproic acid (Kessel and Gruss, 1991; Kessel,
1992; Menegola et al., 1998; Faiella et al., 2000). For all
these substances, the mechanism of action could be the
alteration of expression of the Hox genes implied in the

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 74:185-195, 2005" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2005, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.20035 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="194" -->
<!-- PageHeader="MENEGOLA ET AL." -->

axial segment determination, by different ways of action.
In particular, the teratogenic potential of valproic acid
seems to be related to its inhibitory activity on the
histone deacetylase enzymes, the enzymes controlling
the histone compaction level and, then, the gene
expression (Eikel et al., 2004a, 2004b). As far as retinoic
acid is concerned, its capability to activate the axial Hox
code has been clearly demonstrated (Kessel and Gruss,
1991). Due to these different ways of action, as well as to
their pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties,
determined also by their molecular variables, the potency
and teratogenic degree of these molecules is known to be
different.

At this time, there is no experimental evidence on
the mechanisms implied in triazole teratogenesis. How-
ever, the effects obtained after in vitro exposure of
triazoles are similar to those elicited by retinoic acid
exposure in vitro (Klug et al., 1989; Lee et al., 1995) and
recent data reported that subteratogenic concentrations
of retinoic acid (0.025 uM) and fluconazole (62.5 uM) act
synergistically to induce the typical branchial abnormal-
ities in rat embryos cultured in vitro (Menegola et al.,
2004).

Furthermore, the capability of triazoles to inhibit Cyp
26 activity has been demonstrated in cell cultures
(Schwartz et al., 1995) and the triazole fluconazole is
used clinically to enhance the plasma levels of retinoic
acid in patients treated with this drug. The enzymes of
Cyp 26 family, in fact, catabolize retinoic acid to the
inactive forms 4-oxo- and 4-hydroxy-retinoic acid
(Schwartz et al., 1995; Vanier et al., 2003). The funda-
mental role of Cyp 26 in maintaining the physiologic
concentrations of retinoic acid is demonstrated by the
distribution of Cyp 26 in several embryonic organ buds,
including hindbrain and branchial arches (MacLean
et al., 2001; Abu-Abed et al., 2002). There is, then, a
series of circumstantial evidence showing that the
teratogenic effects elicited both in vitro and in vivo by
triazoles may be mediated by inhibition of Cyp 26 and by
the increase of the endogenous levels of retinoic acid. In
particular, the craniofacial abnormalities related to
alterations of neural crest cell migration and the ectopic
upper jaw cartilage, as well as the axial segment
homeotic transformations, are all relatable to those
elicited by in vivo and in vitro retinoic acid exposure
(Klug et al., 1989; Lee et al, 1995; Menegola et al., 2004;
Kessel and Gruss, 1991; Kessel, 1992).

Other compounds, as the antifungal imidazole-deriva-
tives ketoconazole and itraconazole, are potent inhibitors
of Cyp enzymes (Morita et al., 1992; Ervine et al., 1996;
Colburn et al., 2004). As a consequence, on the basis of
results on triazoles, their teratogenic effects, mediated by
endogenous retinoic acid imbalance, cannot be excluded.
Furthermore, as retinoic acid acts as a morphogen in
different embryonic compartments and in different
developmental stages, it is likely that the administration
of triazoles or other Cyp inhibitors during a number of
morphogenetic processes could result in a wide spectrum
of abnormalities.

In conclusion, the results of this experiment show
the intrinsic teratogenic potential of FON, and
demonstrate that in vitro whole-embryo culture experi-
ments may be useful in predicting the teratogenic
potential of a class of chemicals, even if they currently
have a limited value for risk assessment in humans. On

the basis of the in vitro studies, the teratogenic potential
of FON can be extended to the whole class of triazole
derivatives. Taking into account the large diffusion of
these chemicals in the environment and their use in
human therapy, the safety of this class of substances for
the human conceptus should be, in our opinion,
reconsidered.


## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Mr. Calogero Bella for his skillful technical
assistance.


## REFERENCES

Abu-Abed S, MacLean G, Fraulob V, Chambon P, Petkovich M, Dollè P.
2002. Differential expression of the retinoic acid-metabolizing
enzymes CYP26A1 and CYP26B1 during murine organogenesis.
Mech Dev 110:173-177.

Aleck KA, Bartley DL. 1997. Multiple malformation syndrome following
fluconazole use in pregnancy: report of an additional patient. Am J
Med Genet 72:253-256.

Becker H, Frei D, Sacsse. 1986. Dose finding embryotoxicity (including
teratogenicity) study with KWG 0519 in the rabbit. Unpublished
report N. 3826. Basel, Switzerland: RCC Itingen.

Clagett-Dame M, Plum LA. 1997. Retinoid-regulated gene expression in
neural development. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr 7:299-342.

Colburn DE, Giles FJ, Oladovich D, Smith JA. 2004. In vitro evaluation of
cytochrome P450-mediated drug interactions between cytoarabine,
idarubicin, itraconazole and caspofungin. Hematology 9:217-221.

Di Renzo F, Broccia ML, Massa V, Menegola E, Giavini E. 2003. In vitro
comparative study of the mechanisms involved in triazole-derivative
teratogenesis. Reprod Toxicol 17:503.

Eikel D, Lampen A, Nau H. 2004a. Histonedeacetylases are new
molecular targets whose inhibition can cause birth defects: evidence
from structure-activity relationship of valproic acid derivatives.
Reprod Toxicol 17:723-724.

Eikel D, Hoffmann K, Lampen A, Nau H. 2004b. Hydroxamic acid
derivatives of valproic acid: histonedeacetylase inhibition and
pharmacokinetic profiles in mice. Reprod Toxicol 17:724-725.

Ervine CM, Mattew DE, Brennan B, Houston JB. 1996. Comparison of
ketoconazole and fluconazole as cytochrome P-450 inhibitors. Use of
steady-state infusion approach to achieve plasma concentration-
response relationships. Drug Metab Dispos 24:211-215.

Faiella A, Wernig M, Consalez GG, Hostik U, Hofmann C, Hustert E,
Boncinelli E, Balling R, Nadeau JH. 2000. A mouse model for
valproate teratogenicity: parental effects, homeotic transformations,
and altered HOX expression. Hum Mol Genet 9:227-236.

FAO. 1982. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO) technical papers. FAO plant production and protection
papers. Vol. 42. Pesticide residues in food, 1981-Evaluations.
Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
p 512-523.

FAO. 1985a. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO) technical papers. FAO plant production and protection
papers. Vol. 61. Pesticide residues in food, 1983a-Evaluations.
Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
p 47-57.

FAO. 1985b. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO) technical papers. FAO plant production and protection
papers. Vol. 61. Pesticide residues in food, 1983b-Evaluations.
Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
p 447-450.

FAO. 1990. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO) technical papers. FAO plant production and protection
papers. Vol. 100/2. Pesticide residues in food, 1989-Evaluations,
part II: toxicology. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations. p 117-139.

Gudas LJ. 1994. Retinoids and vertebrate development. J Biol Chem
269:15399-15402.

Johnston MC, Sulik KK, Webster WS, Jarvis BL. 1985. Isotretinoin
embryopathy in a mouse model: Cranial neural crest involvement.
Teratology 31:26A.

Kay ED. 1987. Craniofacial dysmorphogenesis following hypervitamino-
sis A in mice. Teratology 35:105-117.

Kessel M, Gruss P. 1991. Homeotic transformations of murine vertebrae
and concomitant alteration of hox codes induced by retinoic acid.
Cell 67:89-104.

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 74:185-195, 2005" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2005, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.20035 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="195" -->
<!-- PageHeader="TRIADIMEFON-INDUCED SKELETAL DEFECTS" -->

Kessel M. 1992. Respecification of vertebral identities by retinoic acid.
Development 115:487-501.

Kimmel CA, Trammell C. 1981. A rapid procedure for routine double
staining of cartilage and bone in fetal and adult animals. Stain
Technol 56:271-273.

Klug S, Lewandowski C, Wildi L, Neubert D. 1989. All-trans retinoic acid
and 13-cis-retinoic acid in the rat whole-embryo culture: abnormal
development due to the all-trans isomer. Arch Toxicol 63:440-444.

Korte R, Ostenburg I. 1980. Embryotoxicity of KWG 0519 in rabbits.
Unpublished report N. 1901. Munster, FRG: Reprotox GmbH.

Lee BE, Freinberg M, Abraham JJ, Murthy ARK. 1992. Congenital
malformations in an infant born to a woman treated with
fluconazole. Pediatr Infect Dis 11:1062-1064.

Lee YM, Osumi-Yamashita N, Ninomiya Y, Moon CK, Eriksson U, Eto K.
1995. Retinoic acid stage-dependently alters the migration pattern
and identity of hindbrain neural crest cells. Development 121:
825-837.

Machemer L. 1976. Evaluation of embryotoxic and teratogenic effects on
rats following oral administration. Unpublished report N. 6294.
Wuppertal-Elberfeld, FRG: Bayer AG.

Machemer L. 1977. Evaluation of embryotoxic and teratogenic effects on
orally dosed rats. Unpublished report N. 7038. Wuppertal-Elberfeld,
FRG: Bayer AG.

Machera K. 1995. Developmental toxicity of cyproconazole, an inhibitor
of fungal ergosterol biosynthesis, in the rat. Bull Environ Contam
Toxicol 54:363-369.

MacLean G, Abu-Abed S, Dollè P, Tahayato A, Chambon P, Petkovich M.
2001. Cloning a novel retinoic-acid metabolizing cytochrome P450,
Cyp26B1, and comparative expression analysis with Cyp 26A1
during early murine development. Mech Dev 107:195-201.

Mastroiacovo P, Mazzone T, Botto LD, Serafini Ma, Finardi A, Caramelli
L, Fusco D. 1996. Prospective assessment of pregnancy outcomes
after first-trimester exposure to fluconazole. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1775:1645-1650.

Menegola E, Broccia ML, Prati M, Giavini E. 1998. Stage-dependent
skeletal malformations induced by valproic acid in rat. Int J Dev Biol
42:99-102.

Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Prati M, Giavini E. 2000. In vitro
teratogenic potential of two antifungal triazoles: triadimefon and
triadimenol. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol 36:88-95.

Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Giavini E. 2001a. Antifungal
triazoles induce malformations in vitro. Reprod Toxicol 15:
421-427.

Menegola E, Broccia ML, Giavini E. 2001b. Atlas of rat fetal skeleton
double stained for bone and cartilage. Teratology 64:125-133.

Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Giavini E. 2003. Pathogenic
pathways in fluconazole-induced branchial arch malformations.
Birth Defects Res Part A Clin Mol Teratol 67:116-124.

Menegola E, Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Massa V, Giavini E. 2004.
Relationship between hindbrain segmentation, neural crest
cell migration and branchial arch abnormalities in rat embryos
exposed to fluconazole and retinoic acid in vitro. Reprod Toxicol
18:121-130.

Morita K, Konishi H, Shimakawa H. 1992. Fluconazole: a potent inhibitor
of cytochrome P-450-dependent drug-metabolism in mice and
humans in vivo. Comparative study with ketoconazole. Chem
Pharm Bull (Tokyo) 40:1247-1251.

Morriss-Kay G. 1993. Retinoic acid and cranio-facial development:
molecules and morphogenesis. Bioessays 15:9-15.

Morriss-Kay GM, Murphy P, Hill RE, Davidson DR. 1991. Effects of
retinoic acid excess on expression of Hox-29 and Krox 20 and on
morphological segmentation in the hindbrain of mouse embryos.
EMBO J 10:2985-2995.

Pursley TJ, Blomquist IK, Abraham J, Andersen HF, Bartley JA. 1996.
Fluconazole-induced congenital anomalies in three infants. Clin
Infect Dis 22:336-340.

Rogers JM, Brannen KC, Barbee BD, Zucker RM, Degitz SJ. 2004.
Methanol exposure during gastrulation causes holoprosencephaly,
facial dysgenesis, and cervical vertebral malformations in C57BL/6J
mice. Birth Defects Res Part B Dev Reprod Toxicol 71:80-88.

Sanchez JM, Moya G. 1998. Fluconazole teratogenicity. Prenat Diagn
18:862-869.

Schwartz EL, Hallam S, Gallagher RE, Wiernik PH. 1995. Inhibition
of all-trans retinoic acid metabolism by fluconazole in vitro and in
patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia. Biochem Pharmacol
7:923-928.

Sulik KK, Cook CS, Webster WS. 1988. Teratogens and craniofacial
malformations: relationships to cell death. Development 103:
213-232.

Tachibana M, Noguchi Y, Monro AM. 1987. Toxicology of fluconazole in
experimental animals. In: Fromtling RA, editor. Recent trends in the
discovery, development and evaluation of fungal drugs. Barcelona:
JR Prous Science Publishers. p 234-238.

Tiboni GM. 1993. Second branchial arch anomalies induced by flucona-
zole, a bis-triazole antifungal agent, in cultured mouse embryos. Res
Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol 79:381-384.

Unger TM, Van Goethem D, Schellenberger TE. 1982. A teratogenical
evaluation of Bayleton in mated female rats. Unpublished report N.
324. Midwest Research Institute, Mobay Chemical Corporation,
Agricultural Chemical Division, Bayer AG, Monheim, Germany.

Van Cauteren H, Coussement W, Vandenberghe J, Herin V, Vanparys P,
Marsboom R. 1987. The toxicological properties of itraconazole. In:
Fromtling RA, editor, Recent trends in the discovery, development
and evaluation of fungal drugs. Barcelona: JR Prous Science
Publishers.

Vanden Bossche H, Lauvers W, Willemsens G, Marichal P, Cools W. 1984.
The molecular basis for the antifungal activities of N-substituted
azole derivatives. In: Trinci A, Ryles J, editors. The mode of action of
antifungal agents. Cambridge, UK: Symposium of the British
Mycological Society. p 321-341.

Vanier KL, Mattiussi AJ, Johnston DL. 2003. Interaction of all-trans-
retinoic acid with Fluconazole in acute promyelocytic leukemia.
J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 25:403-404.

Vergieva T. 1990. Triazoles teratogenicity in rats. Teratology 42:27A-28A.
Wei X, Makori N, Peterson PE, Hummler H, Hendrickx AG. 1999.
Pathogenesis of retinoic acid-induced ear malformations in a primate
model. Teratology 60:83-92.

White JC, Highland M, Kaiser M, Clagett-Dame M. 2000. Vitamin A
deficiency results in the dose-dependent acquisition of anterior
character and shortening of the caudal hindbrain of the rat embryo.
Dev Biol 220:263-284.

Wiesinger EC, Mayerhofer S, Wenisch C, Breyer S, Graninger W. 1996.
Fluconazole in Candida albicans sepsis during pregnancy: case report
and review of the literature. Infection 24:263-266.

<!-- PageFooter="Birth Defects Research (Part B) 74:185-195, 2005" -->
<!-- PageFooter="15429741, 2005, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bdrb.20035 by Health Canada/Phac P2p Invoices, Wiley Online Library on [20/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License" -->
