<figure>

Taylor & Francis
Taylor & Francis Group

</figure>


<figure>

----

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF
ENVIRONMENTAL
HEALTH RESEARCH

</figure>


<!-- PageHeader="International Journal of Environmental Health Research" -->
<!-- PageHeader="ISSN: 0960-3123 (Print) 1369-1619 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/cije20" -->


# Developmental toxicity potential of paclobutrazol in the rat

Vera Lúcia De Castro, Karina P Goes & Selma H Chiorato

To cite this article: Vera Lúcia De Castro, Karina P Goes & Selma H Chiorato (2004)
Developmental toxicity potential of paclobutrazol in the rat, International Journal of
Environmental Health Research, 14:5, 371-380, DOI: 10.1080/09603120400004055

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09603120400004055

Published online: 22 Jan 2007.

Submit your article to this journal
☒

Article views: 198

Q

View related articles

☒

Citing articles: 5 View citing articles
☒

<!-- PageFooter="Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cije20" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="International Journal of Environmental Health Research 14(5), 371 -380 (October 2004)" -->


<figure>

Taylor &Francis
healthsciences

</figure>


# Developmental toxicity potential of paclobutrazol in the rat

VERA LÚCIA DE CASTRO1, KARINA P. GOES2 and SELMA H. CHIORATO2

1 Embrapa Environment, Jaguariúna, SP, Brazil, 2 School of Biology-PUCC, Campinas, SP, Brazil

Paclobutrazol is used as a fungicide and as a plant growth regulator, but there are few studies about its
potential toxic effects. Experiments were conducted to determine whether this compound has adverse
effects on the reproduction and development of offspring. The influence of 1.0 mg/kg paclobutrazol
(10 x the acceptable daily intake-ADI), by oral exposure during gestational organogenesis of rats, was
evaluated on maturational and behavioural aspects of offspring development. This dose did not promote
evidence of maternal toxicity and the weight of gravid uterus, fetus, and ovary on days 16 and 20 of
pregnancy were not affected. Also, the pesticide did not affect body weight gain of the dams and offspring.
However, the pups' survival at weaning was impaired by paclobutrazol. Beyond that, study of the
functional state of rat pups' nervous system at different stages of postnatal development revealed some
differences in treated ones. Damage was observed in the expression of acoustic startle reflex and altered
locomotion and/or rearing in an open-field apparatus in treated pups depending on their age. There were
no observed alterations in swimming behaviour. The data support further studies of the potentially toxic
effects that exposing mothers to this pesticide may have on their litters.


## Introduction

The identification of environmental compounds that have adverse effects on reproductive
health and animal development is particularly challenging. Toxic effects on newborns by
environmental pollutants have been associated with maternal exposure to various pesticides, as
developmental and reproductive effects, because of their employment worldwide (Barr et al.
1999). Protecting offspring from the developmental hazards of pesticides requires a
comprehensive strategy capable of monitoring the patterns of pesticide use on a continuing
basis (Landrigan et al. 1999). However, as the severity of man's impact on the environment
worsened, it became clear that more sophisticated efforts were needed to systematically monitor
the extent and effects of this input (Golden and Rattner 2003).

Paclobutrazol [(2RS, 3RS)-(4clorofenil)-4,4-dimetil-2-(1H, 1,2,4-triazo-1-yl)pentam-3-ol] is
used as a fungicide and plant growth regulator. It has been commonly used in agriculture and is
frequently sprayed at the same time on various crops, especially fruits. It is frequently applied
to mango trees 2-4 months before flowering which allows for a pre-harvest interval of 6-10
months. The acceptable daily intake (ADI) for paclobutrazol established with CODEX is

Correspondence: Vera Lúcia de Castro, Embrapa Environment, Rodovia SP 340, km 127,5
Jaguariúna, SP, 13820-000 Brazil. Tel .: 5519 3867-8739; Fax: 5519 3867-8740;
E-mail: castro@cnpma.embrapa.br

ISSN 0960-3123 print/ISSN 1369-1619 online/04/050371-10 C 2004 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/09603120400004055

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="372" -->
<!-- PageHeader="de Castro et al." -->

0.1 mg/kg body weight. The maximum residue limits (MRL) in fruits vary from 0.05 to 1.0 mg/
kg, which would result in 0.5 mg/kg per apple.

Very little is known about the dissipation characteristics of this compound in the
environment. Due to soil adsorption, paclobutrazol and its major decomposition products
have low mobility in soils, since paclobutrazol is strongly bound to organic matter. The lack of
polar functional groups in this molecule explains why it is absorbed into the hydrophobic sites
on organic matter. Thus, causes of non-biological loss of paclobutrazol in soil are few since it is
non-volatile and thermally stable (Jackson et al. 1996). The half-life of paclobutrazol in water
was 24.4 days. Its solubility is 35 mg/l and the compound has high potential to leach into
surface and ground water. This compound has the potential of maintaining submersed aquatic
weeds at reduced heights while allowing them to retain useful functions such as oxygen
production and fish habitation. In addition, the ability of natural microbial populations in
small-scale aquatic sediments to degrade these compounds still needs to be investigated (Chand
and Lembi, 1994).

Vergieva (1998) observed the exposure effects of 50 or 200 mg/kg paclobutrazol at 6-15 days
of the pregnancy (organogenesis exposure) or a single dose of 200 or 500 mg/kg at 7, 9, 11 or 13
days of pregnancy on Wistar female rats. After a single treatment, a higher percentage of
fetuses with external and visceral anomalies was observed. Some fetal malformations occurred
with the single dose, mainly the largest dose. During the organogenesis exposure, there was loss
of the maternal weight gain with both doses used. There was also a tendency for an increase in
malformations at the largest dose, while no alterations were observed at the 50 mg/kg dose.

In view of these few results that studied higher dosages of paclobutrazol, an important
issue regarding the toxicology of these compounds concerns these subtle effects on
neurobehavioural development of mammalian progeny following in utero exposure to small
dose levels; lower than those associated with maternal toxicity and more reliably to be
expected in the environment. Thus, the present study was designed to analyse the influence
of lower prenatal exposure to paclobutrazol on maturational and behavioural aspects of
offspring development.

Vulnerability parameters can be used as tools to rank the severity of effects and the
susceptibility of reproduction and developmental damage in a population upon exposure to a
compound. The toxic effects of paclobutrazol have to be further studied since the knowledge
about them is limited. In this way, some reproductive and developmental endpoints will be
analysed in order to produce toxicity data of paclobutrazol in a challenging dose. The results
obtained may aid further discussion about its possible toxic effects and safety.


## Materials and methods

Animals and pesticide dosing

Animals Ninety-day-old Wistar male and nullipara female rats from our own colony,
weighing 230 ± 15 g, were used. Males, previously determined to be fertile, were placed
overnight with females. The presence of a vaginal plug or spermatozoa in vaginal smears of
females was checked the following morning. If they were positive, plug day was considered
gestational day zero. The animals were fed a commercially prepared laboratory diet (Purina
Lab Chow). Pregnant females were placed in polycarbonate single cages with tap water and
food available ad libitum and with hardwood chip bedding, at constant room temperature
(22 ± 2℃) and humidity (70%). Animal rooms were maintained at a 12-hour light/dark
cycle.

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="373" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Developmental toxicity of paclobutrazol" -->

The day of parturition was defined as postnatal day 1 (PND 1). Within 24 h of delivery, all
litters were counted, sexed, and weighed. The pups were separated by sex based on the
anogenital distance. Litters with less than six pups were not included in the experiments. Efforts
were made to retain equal numbers of males and females at a maximum of eight pups per litter
during the first 2 days of life. The dams were checked twice daily (9:00 and 17:00 h) for
parturition. Litters born after 17:00 h were considered as day 1 of life on the next day of
observation.

Pups were weaned on PND 21 and housed by sex, five to a cage. Pup body weights in grams
were recorded on PND 7, 14 and 21 for every pup from each litter. The pups' weights were
considered as means for the litters. The litter was considered as the experimental unit in the
physical landmarks evaluation, when all pups were tested. For behavioural studies, only male
pups were tested. The reflex development was tested using three pups per litter identified with
an ink spot. This protocol design was used in an attempt to minimize the influence on the
obtained data of the effects of intrinsic values of each litter (Wise et al. 1995), such as maternal
behaviour. Other pups from the same litter were kept for neuromotor development evaluation -
open field and swimming tests (Zhu and Stadlin 2000). Only males were tested, since sex can
influence the locomotion (Andrews 1996; Tropp and Markus 2001; Walker et al. 2001). In this
case, the pups were randomly selected and marked with an ink spot. All litters were tested in a
previously determined sequence.

Dosing Dams were randomly assigned to control or treatment groups, which received saline
solution or technical grade paclobutrazol (Cultar®, 250 g/l) respectively. Pesticides were
suspended in 0.9% NaCl saline solution with the addition of two drops of Tween 80. Controls
were injected only with saline plus Tween 80. The volume of Tween 80 was taken into account
for the control or pesticide suspension final volume. Doses were expressed in mg/kg of the
active ingredient (paclobutrazol) of the product. Considering that control and treatment dams
were the same age, weighed approximately the same and were handled in the same way, the
influence of these parameters should have similar impacts on offspring development and/or
behaviour. Dams were injected with 1.0 mg/kg paclobutrazol or saline solution at 7, 11 and 15
days of pregnancy per gavage.

Reproductive performance The females had their vaginal smears examined daily for 12 days
before mating and exposure to pesticides. The oestrous cycle phase of each one was observed
and the number of each phase was compared between the groups by Student t test. This
procedure was carried out to discard any female with problems on her vaginal oestrous
cycle.

The females were divided into two groups: ten dams were exposed to paclobutrazol and
seven were treated as controls. After mating, dams were weighed at 1, 7, 14 and 21 days of
pregnancy and examined daily for signs of toxicity. After parturition, the neonates were
examined for external malformations in their physical appearance. All were observed daily for
mortality and physical signs of toxicity. The number of viable pups, at birth and on the 21st day
of life, and also the fertility of the dams were determined. Viabilities at birth and weaning were
calculated, respectively, as (a) the total number of stillbirths and the number of neonatal deaths
within 24 h and (b) the total number of weaned pups and the number of pups born alive of the
culled litter, and the results were expressed as a percentage. Fertility was defined as the ratio
between pregnant females and the total number of females that mated. The results were also
expressed as a percentage.

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="374" -->
<!-- PageHeader="de Castro et al." -->

Another 40 females were divided into four equal groups (n = 10) exposed to paclobutrazol or
treated as controls. They had their maternal uteri removed by abdominal section on day 16 or
20 of pregnancy to determine the gravid uterus, fetal, placental and ovary weight.

Landmark development All litters were observed using the following physical developmental
parameters to evaluate the possible effects of pesticide exposure: pinna detachment
(unfolding of external ear), development of fur, incisor teeth eruption, ear and eye opening
and descent of testes (descending of testicles into the scrotum); with the days required for
the appearance of these landmarks registered, until all pups in the litter were positive for the
developmental parameter. Age at eye or ear opening was recorded when both eyes or ears
were completely opened. Incisor eruption was examined daily to determine the first day of
the bilateral appearance of the upper and lower incisors. The frequency of animals showing
each of the above parameters and their time of appearance according to age were observed.
As a basis of all postnatal behavioural studies, the appearance of physical signs had to be
recorded and compared with the normal physical development of the strain and species used
(Alder 1983).

All pups were removed from the nest with a paper towel, and placed on a heating pad to
provide warmth before and after testing. The order of testing the litters was determined by
chance.

Reflex development and neuromuscular maturation Throughout the lactation period, three
male pups of each dam were evaluated for reflex development and neuromuscular maturation
(n = 30 for paclobutrazol and n = 21 for control) to evaluate the possible effects of pesticide
exposure. The animals showing each of the parameters tested were observed according to their
age (Alder 1983).

The parameters tested were: (1) righting reflex (PND 2-5) - the newborn was placed on
its back on a padded plain surface, and quickly set free. Time was measured until the animal
had turned over on its ventral surface. Reflex was considered to be formed if the rat pups
regained their position on four paws and the test was no longer than 30 s; (2) grip response
(PND 3-7) - the pup was suspended with its forepaws on a horizontal rod and its grip
strength was measured; (3) climbing time response (PND 6-11) - the pup's climbing time
on an inclined screen (45°) made of a wire mesh was measured. The test was no longer than
120 s. This test reflects development of grasping reflex and grip strength; and (4) acoustic
startle response (PND 11-14) - the presence or absence of a startle response that was
elicited by a sharp noise which was produced near the pup was measured. The animal was
put on a nonrestrictive padded plain surface. The test session began with a 5-min
acclimatization period with a background noise. After that, rats were exposed to stimuli that
consisted of one 80 dB pulse of a bell for 1 s.


### Neuromotor development evaluation

Swimming test An aquarium (25 x 30 x 60 cm), filled with water (25℃) was used for the test
between 10 a.m. to 12 noon. Three pups of each offspring were dropped from three times their
own height into the centre of the aquarium (n = 30 for paclobutrazol and n = 21 for control)
on PND 7, 14 and 21. They were observed for 10 s. These rats were used haphazardly.

Swimming performance was evaluated according to the position of the nose and head on the
surface of the water to measure the motor development (St. Omer and Mohammad, 1987).
After the test, the animals were dried and returned to the home cage. The angle of swimming

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="375" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Developmental toxicity of paclobutrazol" -->

was rated as follows: 0-nose below surface; 1-nose at or above surface; 2-nose and top of
head at or above surface but ears still below surface; 3-same as 2 except water line at midear
level; 4-same as 3 except water line at bottom of ears.

Open-field studies The activity behaviour of male offspring on PND 21, 30 and 60 was
evaluated in an open-field arena (Castro et al. 1992). The same two pups per offspring in each
one of the experimental groups were used for each day of the test (n = 20 for paclobutrazol and
n = 14 for control).

Hand-operated counters and stopwatches were used to score ambulating frequency (number
of units entered), rearing frequency (number of times the animal stood on hind legs) and
immobility time (total time in seconds without any spontaneous movements). The experiments
were blind to the treatment group.

For this study, each animal was placed in the centre of the arena and the behavioural
parameters were assessed for 6 min, divided into two equal periods. After each animal
observation, the arena was washed with a 5% alcohol-water solution. To minimize possible
circadian influences on behaviour, experimental and control animals were observed intermixed.

Statistical procedures The variables of percentage in the reproductive performance were
analysed by x2 test, and to determine the statistical significance of body gain weight among
groups, analysis of variance (ANOVA) for profile data (Morrison 1976) using the procedure
GLM of SAS (1988) was used. Physical landmarks and reflex development parameters were
analysed using one-way ANOVA and the data are presented as means ( ± SEM). The changes
in body weight among groups and open-field variables were evaluated by repeated ANOVA
using the procedure GLM of SAS, since the same animals were analysed at various ages.

For the analysis of the pups' survival, the pups' days of life and a x2 test analysing
proportions of deaths were utilized. The variables of reproductive performance, gravid uterus,
fetal, placental and ovary weight were analysed via Student t-test. The scores of the swimming
test were compared by ANOVA to determine statistical significance. The level used to establish
statistical significance was P < 0.05.

The personnel that monitored the tests were blind to the treatment group.


## Results


### Reproductive performance and viability of pups

The fertility of the dams as well as the number of viable pups at birth were not affected by
treatment. However, the end of the nursing period showed a significant decrease in survival of
experimental pups (21st day of life-x2 = 4.45; log-rank = 4.25; P = 0.03) (Table 1). The
majority of deaths occurred on PND 1. The last day for this finding was PND 18 in the
experimental group and PND 2 in the control group. The experimental group presented 17% of
deaths (17/81) and the control group 4% (2/43). The reason for this remains unclear since the
neonates did not show any physical signs of toxicity and there were no statistical differences in
body weights (F = 1.30; GL = 1.15; P = 0.27) of control and treated animals on PND 1
(5.98 ± 1.16 and 5.53 ± 1.09); PND 7 (12.60 ± 1.84 and 11.66 ± 1.25); PND 14 (24.01 ± 4.34
and 20.53 ± 2.23) and PND 21 (37.18 ± 8.93 and 36.52 ± 5.07), respectively. Also, the
maternal weight gain was similar in control and treated groups tested (232.71 ± 21.00 and
253.00 ± 32.80 at the beginning of pregnancy and 266.00 ± 20.36 and 283.30 ± 33.70 at day 21
of pregnancy respectively-F = 2.30; GL = 1.15; P = 0.15).

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="376" -->
<!-- PageHeader="de Castro et al." -->


<table>
<caption>Table 1. Viability of pups after maternal exposure to paclobutrazol (n = 10) or to control solution (n = 7), v.o. during pregnancy. The number of viable pups at birth and the end of lactation on the 21st day of life was determined (x2 test, ªP &lt; 0.05). Data were expressed as percentage of each parameter observed</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Parameters</th>
<th colspan="2">Groups</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Control</th>
<th>Paclobutrazol</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fertility of dams</td>
<td>100.0 (7/7)</td>
<td>100.0 (10/10)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Viability of pups at birth</td>
<td>100.0 (45/45)</td>
<td>100.0 (98/98)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Viability of pups at weaning</td>
<td>95.55 (43/45)</td>
<td>82.65 (81/98)ª</td>
</tr>
</table>


<table>
<caption>Table 2. Summary of pregnancy data on days 16 or 20 of pregnancy of females exposed to paclobutrazol (n = 10) or to control solution (n = 7), v.o. during pregnancy (n = 10). Data were expressed as mean ± sd (grams), Student t-test, ªP &lt; 0.05</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Weight (g)</th>
<th colspan="4">Groups</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Paclobutrazol</th>
<th colspan="2">Control</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Days of pregnancy</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>20</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Gravid uterus</td>
<td>10.41 ± 5.67</td>
<td>32.10 ± 11.96</td>
<td>12.56 ± 3.31</td>
<td>33.56 ± 5.63</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fetus</td>
<td>0.31 ± 0.15</td>
<td>2.20 ± 0.28</td>
<td>0.24 ± 0.07</td>
<td>2.04 ± 0.18</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Placenta</td>
<td>0.24 ± 0.10</td>
<td>0.54 ± 0.10a</td>
<td>0.20 ± 0.02</td>
<td>0.46 ± 0.05</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ovary</td>
<td>0.16 ± 0.03</td>
<td>0.19 ± 0.02</td>
<td>0.17 ± 0.02</td>
<td>0.21 ± 0.06</td>
</tr>
</table>


The weight of gravid uterus, fetus, and ovary were not affected on days 16 and 20 of
pregnancy by treatment. However, the placenta weight was enhanced on day 20 but not at day
16 of pregnancy (Table 2).


### Landmark development, reflex development and neuromuscular maturation

All litters were observed daily to evaluate the possible effects of pesticide exposure. The results
were analysed by ANOVA to verify if there was significant slowing or speeding up of
developmental stages or one of the physical developmental parameters.

The animals, regardless of treatment, were able to reach each of the physical parameter's
frequencies of the tested landmarks according to the pups' age. The frequency of animals
showing each of the parameters tested on a certain day of life was not different in both groups.

The appearance of physical parameters to all control and treated pups occurred respectively
as follows: pinna detachment PND 2.71 ± 0.48 and 3.10 ± 0.73; development of fur PND
5.40 ± 0.37 and 5.14 ±0.51; incisor teeth eruption PND 4.57 ± 0.78 and 4.90 ±0.73. The
appearance of ear and eye opening occurred respectively on PND 11.57 ± 0.97 and
11.90 ± 1.19, and 14.00 ± 0.57 and 14.80 ±1.68. The physical parameters of sexual maturing
(descent of testes into the scrotum) occurred on PND 23.14 ± 1.95 and 23.70 ± 1.70
respectively to control and treated pups.

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="377" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Developmental toxicity of paclobutrazol" -->

Three male pups of each dam were evaluated for their reflex development and neuromuscular
maturation. The parameters tested were: righting reflex; grip response; climbing time response
and acoustic startle response. The study of functional state of the rat pups' nervous system at
different stages of postnatal development revealed differences as to when the reflex was
expressed. The appearance of acoustic startle response was delayed for paclobutrazol rat pups
in relation to control ones (x2 = 4.76; GL = 1; P < 0.03) (Table 3).


### Swimming test

The swimming performance was evaluated according to the position of the nose and head on
the surface of the water. The pups' performance observed was similar in all groups tested
(F = 0.76; GL = 1.15, P = 0.39). The swimming behaviour medium scores of offspring exposed
to paclobutrazol were 1, 2, 4 and to control solution was 0, 2, 4 on PND 7, 14 and 21
respectively.


### Open-field studies

The activity behaviour of male offspring on PND 21, 30 and 60 was presented in Table 4. Open-
field testing resulted in an alteration of the locomotion on PND 21 and rearing frequency in the
experimental group in relation to the control group at all days of open-field test when ANOVA
was made (F = 11.16; GL = 1; 16; P < 0.004 and F = 6.41; GL = 1; 80; P < 0.01 respectively).


## Discussion

The traditional approaches to testing for the reproductive and developmental effects of
environmental agents like pesticides have been fairly standard for a number of years. Within
the last decade, a number of efforts have been undertaken to improve the testing protocols


<table>
<caption>Table 3. Performance of pups exposed to paclobutrazol or to control solution, v.o., during pregnancy. Three pups of each litter were used for the performance evaluation (n = 30 and 21 respectively). Data were expressed as mean + SD to show the parameter tested, ANOVA, ªP &lt; 0.05</caption>
<tr>
<th>Landmark development group</th>
<th>Days of life to show the developmental landmark</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Righting reflex</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Control</td>
<td>2.95 ± 0.97</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Paclobutrazol</td>
<td>2.90 ± 0.96</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Grip response</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Control</td>
<td>3.61 ± 0.74</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Paclobutrazol</td>
<td>3.60 ± 0.72</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Climbing time response</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Control</td>
<td>7.47 ± 1.83</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Paclobutrazol</td>
<td>7.83 ± 1.53</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Acoustic startle response</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Control</td>
<td>12.23 ± 0.94</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Paclobutrazol</td>
<td>13.20 ± 1.66ª</td>
</tr>
</table>


<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="378" -->
<!-- PageHeader="de Castro et al." -->


<table>
<caption>Table 4. Open-field performance of offspring exposed to paclobutrazol (n = 10) or to control solution (n = 7), v.o., during pregnancy. The parameters observed were locomotor (LO) and rearing (RE) frequencies and immobility time (ID). Data were expressed as mean + SD and were analysed by ANOVA followed by Fisher test -ªP &lt; 0.05</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Parameter and day of observation</th>
<th colspan="2">Groups</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Control</th>
<th>Paclobutrazol</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LO 21</td>
<td>7.57 ± 4.88</td>
<td>22.65 ± 16.11ª</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LO 30</td>
<td>26.43 ± 10.89</td>
<td>24.00 ± 17.65</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LO 60</td>
<td>16.14 ± 13.55</td>
<td>17.25 ± 12.76</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>RE 21</td>
<td>7.07 ± 3.81</td>
<td>12.65 ± 5.72ª</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>RE 30</td>
<td>12.21 ± 5.13</td>
<td>14.90 ± 11.07ª</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>RE 60</td>
<td>5.14 ± 4.59</td>
<td>5.80 ± 3.30a</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ID 21</td>
<td>4.07 ± 9.27</td>
<td>3.90 ± 6.77</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ID 30</td>
<td>10.36 ± 21.52</td>
<td>18.25 ± 29.12</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ID 60</td>
<td>17.50 ± 22.93</td>
<td>17.75 ± 38.34</td>
</tr>
</table>


available and to add endpoints that provide a better characterization of these effects of
chemical exposure.

The paclobutrazol did not show damage of the developmental landmarks at the dose
tested. The effects observed in the present work could mainly be a consequence of prenatal
exposure since maternal treatment was restricted to a phase of the gestation period and,
because of this, it might be assumed that there were no circulating levels of the pesticides at
birth.

The pesticide did not appear to cause congenital malformations at term. Besides, the
placentas' weight enhancement on day 20 of pregnancy may be an artifact; since no other
significant effects were observable in pregnancy data during the tests.

However, pups from dams exposed to paclobutrazol during their gestational period,
presented a diminution of survival at the end of lactation. There were no differences in body
weight of the pups, yet 17% of the pups in the treated group died before the end of weaning.
This effect is unlikely to be a consequence of a general toxic effect of the treatment because the
dose of paclobutrazol given to pregnant rats did not cause overt signs of maternal toxicity and
did not affect maternal weight.

The ways to explain the alterations of survival caused by these pesticides are devisable, but to
further understand these effects on rat offspring, additional reproductive and toxic-kinetic
studies should be carried out to determine the extent of exposure to paclobutrazol in utero. This
effect may be due to the interaction of pesticide with some physiological system that is
determinant of somatic, physical and behavioural development in postnatal life. The present
data are a confirmation of the sensitivity of the animals, in the perinatal period, to pesticides
whose effects are not always easily predictable.

The acoustic startle reflex is a relatively simple protective behaviour, which is mediated by a
well-known oligosynaptic neuronal circuit. The use of a relatively simple startle reflex could
demonstrate several important forms of behavioural plasticity including habituation, fear
potentiation and sensorimotor gating. Although the acoustic startle response is a simple
behaviour, the regulating mechanism is complex (Zhu and Stadlin 2000). Several brain areas

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="379" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Developmental toxicity of paclobutrazol" -->

with different critical development periods such as the subcortex, cerebellum and labyrinthine
system are involved in these tests.

Locomotor activity is often used as an index of an animal's reactivity and adjustment to
novel and, to some extent, stressful situations. Therefore, xenobiotic maternal exposure may
alter the manner in which the progeny react and adapt to novel test environments as evidenced
by the open field test (Kishi et al. 1995). It seems important to evaluate the present alterations
with more details, since they may be related to the physiological systems also involved in
acoustic startle response pesticide effects.

Alterations in nervous system development and its system plasticity, such as alterations in
cholinergic function, which is implicated in cognitive functions (Everitt and Robbins 1997;
Winkler et al. 2000), can be evidenced by this test. Furthermore, dopaminergic function is
correlated with motor behaviour (Castro et al. 1992), and the open-field test can also reveal
some disturbance at this neuro-transmitter system.

Alterations in the locomotor (PND 21) and rearing frequencies (PND 21, 30, 60) were
observed at the open-field apparatus. However, the data showed large standard deviations were
obtained and the immobility time findings of this study should be regarded with care. The early
experiences of the young pups during the performance of many tests may itself be a stressful
procedure. As a consequence, pups' responses may become erratic, regardless of which of the
testing systems is applied. The early neurochemical effects on the brain can have long-term
behavioural consequences for the developing organism (Bekkedal et al. 1999).

Although the open-field test could reveal alterations at exploration and motor activity
(Castro et al. 1992), the protocol design of this test should be improved in future studies, to
produce more uniform results. Depending on the experimental design, where the duration of
testing is short for example, results may be biased (Hall et al. 2000). Since environmental
manipulations may interact with the open-field results and processes like emotionality,
exploration, learning and memory, and anxiety among others (Lehmann et al. 2000;
Zimmerman et al. 2001), a variety of contexts will be employed to most sensitive open-field
tests in order to differentiate the various behaviour expressions involved in it. In this way, more
sensitive endpoints would have perhaps picked up different effects at low dose levels of
pesticides. In spite of this, the findings of this study should be regarded with care because the
activity of the pups should have been sufficient to detect any delayed significant negative impact
on motor activity resulting from that exposure.


## Conclusion

The results showed that when paclobutrazol at 10 x ADI was administered to rats, few changes
were observed. At this point there is no evidence that ADI is associated with a risk to human
and/or environmental health. The characterization of these few affected endpoints by prenatal
exposure to paclobutrazol is an indication toward a more specific analysis of maturational and
behavioural effects. The data to be obtained may be useful to better explain the present results.


## References

Adler, S. (1983) Behavioural teratology. In Application of Behavioral Pharmacology in Toxicology (Q.
Zbinden, G. Racagni, V. Cuomo and B. Weiss, eds), pp. 57-66. New York: Raven Press.

Andrews, J. (1996) Possible confounding influence of strain, age, and gender on cognitive performance in
rats. Cognitive Brain Res. 3, 251-67.

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="380" -->
<!-- PageHeader="de Castro et al." -->

Barr, D., Barr, J., Driskell, J., Hill Jr., R., Ashley, D., Needham, L., Head, S. and Sampson, E. (1999)
Strategies for biological monitoring of exposure for contemporary-use pesticides. Toxicol. Ind.
Health 15, 168-79.

Bekkedal, M., Rossi, J. and Panksepp, J. (1999) Fetal and neonatal exposure to trimethylolpropane
phosphate alters rat social behavior and emotional responsivity. Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 21, 435-
43.

Castro, V., Bernardi, M. and Palermo-Neto, J. (1992) Evaluation of prenatal aldrin intoxication in rats.
Arch. Toxicol. 66, 149-52.

Chand, T. and Lembi, C.A. (1994) Dissipation of gibberelin synthesis inhibitors in small-scale aquatic
systems. J. Aquat. Plant Man. 22, 15-20.

Everitt, B. and Robbins, T. (1997) Central cholinergic systems and cognition. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 48,
649-84.

Golden, N. and Rattner, B. (2003) Ranking terrestrial vertebrate species for utility in biomonitoring and
vulnerability to environmental contaminants. Rev. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 176, 67-136.

Hall, F., Huang, S., Fonga, G., Sundstrom, J. and Pert, A. (2000) Differential basis of strain and rearing
effects on open-field behavior in Fawn Hooded and Wistar rats. Physiol. Behav. 71, 525-32.

Jackson, M., Line, M. and Hasan, O. (1996) Microbial degradation of a recalcitrant plant growth
retardant-paclobutrazol (PP333). Soil Biol. Biochem. 28, 1265-7.

Kishi, R., Chen, B., Katakura, Y., Ikeda T. and Miyake, H. (1995) Effect of prenatal exposure to styrene
on the neurobehavioral development, activity, motor coordination, and learning behavior of rats.
Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 17, 121-30.

Landrigan, P., Claudio, L., Markowitz, S., Brakowitz, G., Breneer, B., Romero, H., Wetmua, J., Matte,
T., Gore, A., Godbold, J. and Wolff, M. (1999) Pesticides and inner-city children: exposures, risk
and prevention. Environ. Health Persp. 107, 431-7.

Lehmann, J., Stohr, T. and Feldon, J. (2000) Long-term effects of prenatal stress experiences and postnatal
maternal separation on emotionality and attentional processes. Behav. Brain Res. 107, 133-44.
Morrison, D. (1976) Multivariate statistical methods, 2nd edn, pp. 213-6, McGraw-Hill: Kogakusha,
Tokyo.

SAS Institute Inc. (1988) SAS/STAT User's Guide®, Version 6.03. Cary, NC, p. 1028.

Tropp, J. and Markus, E. (2001) Sex differences in the dynamics of cue utilization and exploratory
behavior. Behav. Brain Res. 119, 143-54.

Vergieva, T. (1998) Single day treatment - a feasible tool in revealing not dependent on maternal toxicity
teratogenic potential. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 444, 191-9.

Walker, Q., Cabassa, J., Kaplan, K., Li, S., Haroon, J., Spohr, H. and Kuhn, C. (2001) Sex differences in
cocaine-stimulated motor behavior disparate effects of gonadectomy. Neuropsychopharmacol. 25,
118-30.

Winkler, J., Ramirez, G., Thal, L. and Waite, J. (2000) Nerve growth factor (NGF) augments cortical and
hippocampal cholinergic functioning after p75NGF receptor-mediated deafferentation but
impairs inhibitory avoidance and induces fear-related behaviors. J. Neurosci. 20, 834-44.

Wise, L., Gordon, L., Soper, K., Duchai, D. and Morrisey, R. (1995) Developmental neurotoxicity
evaluation of acrylamide in Sprague-Dawley rats. Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 17, 189-98.

Zhu, J. and Stadlin, A. (2000) Prenatal heroin exposure. Effects on development, acoustic startle response,
and locomotion in weanling rats. Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 22, 193-203.

Zimmermann, A., Stauffacher, M., Langhans, W. and Würbel, H. (2001) Enrichment-dependent
differences in novelty exploration in rats can be explained by habituation. Behav. Brain Res.
121, 11-20.
