<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775 DOI 10.1007/s10552-010-9603-9" -->

ORIGINAL PAPER


# Body mass index, agricultural pesticide use, and cancer incidence in the Agricultural Health Study cohort

Gabriella Andreotti . Lifang Hou . Laura E. Beane Freeman .
Rajeev Mahajan . Stella Koutros . Joseph Coble . Jay Lubin .
Aaron Blair . Jane A. Hoppin . Michael Alavanja

Received: 29 December 2009 / Accepted: 3 June 2010/Published online: 22 August 2010
@ US Government 2010

Abstract Obesity is associated with increased risks of
several cancers including colon and female breast. Pesticide
use in agricultural populations has also been linked with
higher risks of various cancers. However, the interaction
between obesity and pesticide use on cancer risk has not been
well studied. Using data from the Agricultural Health Study,
we examined the association between body mass index
(BMI) and the risk of cancer at 17 sites and the interaction
between BMI and pesticide use. Pesticide applicators
residing in Iowa and North Carolina and their spouses were
enrolled between 1993 and 1997 and given a self-adminis-
tered questionnaire to obtain pesticide use and other infor-
mation. This analysis included 39,628 men and 28,319
women with height and weight data who were cancer-free at
enrollment. Among these participants, 4,432 were diagnosed
with cancer between enrollment and 2005 and 64% were
overweight or obese. BMI (per 1 kg/m2) was positively

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this
article (doi: 10.1007/s10552-010-9603-9) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.

G. Andreotti (X) . L. Hou . L. E. Beane Freeman .

R. Mahajan . S. Koutros . J. Coble . J. Lubin . A. Blair .

M. Alavanja

Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, DHHS, 6120 Executive
Blvd., EPS 8011, MSC 7240, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
e-mail: andreotg@mail.nih.gov

L. Hou

Department of Preventive Medicine & Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA

J. A. Hoppin

Epidemiology Branch, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, NIH, DHHS, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA

associated with colon cancer in men (hazard ratio (HR) 1.05,
95% confidence interval (CI) 1.02-1.09) and breast cancer in
postmenopausal women (HR 1.03, 95% CI 1.01-1.06). In
contrast, BMI was inversely associated with lung cancer in
men, with a significant association in ever smokers (HR 0.92,
95% CI 0.88-0.97) and a null association in never smokers.
The positive association between BMI and colon cancer in
men was significant in those who ever used carbofuran
(HR = 1.10, 95% CI 1.04-1.17; p-interaction = 0.04) or
metolachlor (HR = 1.09, 95% CI 1.04-1.15; p-interac-
tion = 0.02) but was null in non-users of these pesticides.
Among male ever smokers, the inverse association between
BMI and lung cancer was significant in non-users of carbo-
furan (HR = 0.87, 95% CI = 0.82-0.92) but was null in
users of carbofuran (p-interaction = 0.02). These findings
suggest that certain pesticides may modify the effects of BMI
on the risks of colon and lung cancers.


## Keywords Obesity . Body mass index . Pesticides . Cancer · Agriculture


## Introduction

The prevalence of obesity in the United States has doubled
since the 1980s. Currently, one-third of US adults are obese
and another third are overweight [1]. Obesity has been
associated with higher risks of several cancers, including
colon, lower esophagus, kidney, gallbladder, female breast,
and endometrium [2-4]. The association between obesity
and cancer is likely linked to several related factors
including diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, low
physical activity, and a high-fat diet, [4] and involves
several possible biological mechanisms such as increased

<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1760" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->

availability of growth and sex hormones, increased insulin,
inflammation, altered immunity, cell proliferation, and
angiogenesis [2, 4, 5].

Excess cancer rates, particularly for prostate, lym-
phohematopoetic, brain, stomach, and soft-tissue tumors
have been reported among agricultural workers and
pesticide applicators and manufacturers around the world
[6-10]. Several epidemiological studies have reported
associations between specific pesticides and increased
cancer risks [11, 12]. It has been suggested that lipophilic
pesticides may increase cancer risk via their persistent
accumulation in adipose tissue, slow release into the blood
and peripheral tissues, and eventual impact on the endo-
crine system [13-15]. Organochlorines are the only class
of pesticides considered to be lipophilic as they are
hydrophobic and accumulate in animal and human adipose
tissue, although certain pesticides in other classes may
have lipophilic properties [13, 15]. Because of the accu-
mulation of lipophilic pesticides in adipose tissue, there is
speculation that obese persons may have a greater capacity
to accumulate and a higher body burden of these con-
taminants [16, 17]. Non-lipophilic pesticides have been
linked to cancer via pathways closely related to obesity
such as hormones and oxidative stress [18, 19]. Further-
more, laboratory studies have reported that toxicants such
as pesticides may contribute to obesity [20-22]. Together,
these factors support the possibility of a joint effect of
pesticides and obesity on cancer risk, but this has not been
well studied in humans. In this analysis, we examine the
association between body mass index (BMI) and the risk of
cancer at 17 sites, as well as the interaction between BMI
and pesticide use, in a population of US private applicators
(mostly farmers), commercial pesticide applicators, and
spouses.


## Materials and methods


### Study subjects

Details of the Agricultural Health Study (AHS) have been
previously reported [23]. Briefly, the AHS cohort is com-
posed of over 89,000 participants, including licensed pri-
vate pesticide applicators and their spouses residing in
Iowa and North Carolina, and commercial applicators
residing in Iowa. In total, 57,310, or 82%, of applicators
seeking pesticide licensing in each state, were enrolled in
the study between 13 December 1993 and 31 December
1997. In addition, spouses of enrolled private applicators
were asked to participate, and a total of 32,346, or 75%,
chose to participate. The study protocol was approved by
all appropriate institutional review boards.


## Data ascertainment

At enrollment, applicators completed a self-administered
questionnaire collecting information on demographics,
lifestyle factors, medical histories, ever/never use of 50
pesticides, and detailed use information (number of days
and years pesticides were applied, use of personal protec-
tive equipment, and application methods) on 22 of the 50
pesticides. A self-administered take-home questionnaire
was given to all enrolled applicators to collect additional
information, including weight, height, and detailed use on
the other 28 pesticides; this questionnaire was returned by
44% of the enrolled applicators. No meaningful differences
were found between applicators who completed and did not
complete the take-home questionnaire [24]. For spouses,
information on demographics, lifestyle factors, medical
histories, height/weight, and ever/never use of the same 50
pesticides was primarily obtained from a self-administered
questionnaire (81%) at enrollment and a follow-up tele-
phone interview (19%).

Of all enrolled participants, 43% were missing height
and weight data. To supplement these missing data, two
additional sources, primarily the 5-year follow-up phone
interview as well as driver's license data from 1985, were
used. In Iowa, drivers' licenses contain height and weight
information, while in North Carolina they contain only
height. After using these additional sources, and removing
subjects with implausible BMI values (<11 or >70 kg/m2),
we had height and weight data on 67,947 participants (76%
of total cohort). Among these participants, 64.6% reported
weight at enrollment. For the remaining subjects, weight at
enrollment was estimated from the 5-year follow-up and/or
driver's license data using a regression model designed to
estimate weight at the time of enrollment. Among the
participants, 16.2% had weight estimated using only the
5-year follow-up and 19.1% using both 5-year follow-up
and driver's license data. Data from the 5-year follow-up
interview was also used to obtain the most current
menopause status of female participants. Questionnaires
are available on the AHS website (www.aghealth.org/
questionnaires.html).


## Cancer identification

Cancer cases were identified using population-based state
cancer registries. Only incident cancer cases diagnosed
between enrollment and 31 December 2005 (median fol-
low-up of over 10 years) were included, and participants
with any type of cancer diagnosed prior to enrollment were
excluded from the analysis. Vital status was obtained from
the state death registries and the National Death Index.
Participants who moved out of North Carolina or Iowa
(based on address information from Internal Revenue

<!-- PageFooter="42 Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1761" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->

Service records) were not followed for cancer occurrence
after moving, and follow-up times were censored at date of
exit from the state.


## Statistical analysis

For this study, we included participants with weight and
height data, which totaled 38,190 private applicators, 2,325
commercial applicators, and 27,432 spouses. BMI was
calculated as weight (kg) divided by the square of height
(m2) and grouped as follows: underweight (<18.5 kg/m2),
normal (18.5-24.9 kg/m2), overweight (25-29.9 kg/m2),
obese I (30.0-34.9 kg/m2), and obese II/III (≥35 kg/m2)
[25]. The chi-square test was used to assess statistically
significant differences between BMI groups and selected
characteristics.

Associations between BMI and cancer were evaluated
separately by sex due to the differences in risk factors for
cancer between sexes. There were a sufficient number of
cases (at least 10 for each sex) to examine 17 cancer sites.
Hazard rate ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (95%
CI) were calculated using a Cox proportional-hazard
regression model using age at enrollment and age at exit
[minimum of: cancer diagnosis, death, or end of follow-up
(31 December 2005)] as the start and end of follow-up,
respectively. A backward elimination procedure was con-
ducted in order to determine the most parsimonious model
for each of the 17 cancers evaluated. Initially, models
included the following potential confounding factors: race
(white, other), state of residence (Iowa, North Carolina),
education (high school or lower, greater than high school),
smoking status (never, former, current), alcohol intake in
past 12 months (no, yes), hypertension (no, yes), diabetes
(no, yes), family history of cancer (no, yes), meat intake
(≤3 per month, 1-2 per week ≥ 3 per week), fruit intake
(<1 per day, 1-2 per day, ≥3 per day), vegetable
intake (<1 per day, 1-2 per day, ≥3 per day), vitamin
supplement (no, yes-not regularly, yes-regularly), and
leisure-time exercise (0, <1, 1-2, 3-5, >5 h per week), as
well as menopause status at the follow-up interview (pre,
post) and parity (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, >4) for women. Iteratively,
the factor with the highest p-value above 0.05 was removed
from the model until only those factors that contributed
10% or more change in the HR remained. We also exam-
ined associations between BMI and cancer using a linear
test of trend with a continuous BMI variable (per 1 kg/m2).

For the interaction between BMI and pesticide use, we
examined pesticides used by at least 10% of male partici-
pants (36 pesticides: 16 insecticides, 17 herbicides,
2 fungicides, 1 fumigant) and 10% of female participants
(5 pesticides: 3 insecticides, 2 herbicides). We examined
use of any organochlorine insecticide (aldrin, chlordane,
DDT, dieldrin, heptachlor, lindane, toxaphene) and any

organophosphate insecticide (chlorpyrifos, coumaphos,
diazinon, dichlorvos, fonofos, malathion, parathion, pho-
rate, terbufos, trichlorofon). The cancer sites examined
were those with at least 100 cases per sex (bladder, colon,
lung, melanoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, prostate, and
rectal for men; and breast and colon for women). Tests of
interaction between ever/never pesticide use and continu-
ous BMI were conducted using a cross-product interaction
term in the Cox regression model. We calculated HRs and
95% CIs for cancer risk in relation to BMI (<25, 25-29.9,
and ≥30 kg/m2) stratified by ever/never use of each pes-
ticide using a Cox regression model with the appropriate
adjustments for each cancer. Associations with less than
five exposed subjects per BMI category were not evaluated.
SAS version 9.1 (Cary, NC) and the AHS data release
PIREL0612 were used to conduct all analyses.


## Results

Of the 67,947 subjects, 0.8% were underweight, 34.8%
were normal, 43% were overweight, 16.7% were moder-
ately obese (obese I), and 4.7% were highly obese (obese
II/III) (Table 1). Compared to normal weight subjects,
underweight subjects were more likely to be women, young
(<40 years) or old (≥70 years), current smokers, never
alcohol drinkers, non-hypertensive, high fruit consumers
(≥3 servings/day), and do no or little exercise. In contrast,
compared to normal weight subjects, overweight or obese
subjects were more likely to be men, middle-aged (40-69),
lower educated (high school or less), former smokers,
hypertensive, diabetic, low fruit and vegetable consumers,
take no vitamin supplements, and do no or little exercise.

We found a statistically significant positive trend for
BMI (per 1 kg/m2) and colon cancer among men (HR 1.05,
95% CI 1.02-1.09; p-trend = 0.005) adjusting for race,
education, and family history of colon cancer (Table 2).
Overweight men had a 1.25-fold (95% CI = 0.85-1.85),
obese I men a 1.88-fold (95% CI = 1.22-2.91), and obese
II/III men a 2.03-fold 95% CI = 1.05-3.93) risk of colon
cancer compared to normal weight men, with a significant
test of trend (p-trend = 0.005). For rectal cancer, obese II/
III men had a 3.21-fold (95% CI = 1.34-7.71) risk com-
pared to normal weight men adjusting for meat consump-
tion, but the test of trend was borderline statistically
significant (p-trend = 0.06). We observed increased, but
not statistically significant, risks of stomach and bladder
cancers with higher BMI among men. In contrast, the risks
of lung and oral cancers decreased with higher BMI.
Stratifying by smoking status, we found a statistically
significant inverse association between BMI (per 1 kg/m2)
and lung cancer among ever smokers (HR = 0.92, 95%
CI = 0.88-0.97, p-trend = 0.001) adjusting for state, race,

<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1762" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 1 Distribution of study population by BMI categories and selected characteristics</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Characteristics</th>
<th colspan="2">Total</th>
<th colspan="2">Underweight (BMI &lt; 18.5 kg/m2)</th>
<th colspan="2">Normal Weight (BMI 18.5-24.9 kg/m2)</th>
<th colspan="2">Overweight (BMI 25-29.9 kg/m2)</th>
<th colspan="2">Obese I (BMI 30-34.9 kg/m2)</th>
<th colspan="2">Obese II + III (BMI ≥ 35 kg/m2)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>All subjects</td>
<td>67,947</td>
<td>100.0</td>
<td>513</td>
<td>0.8</td>
<td>23,620</td>
<td>34.8</td>
<td>29,235</td>
<td>43.0</td>
<td>11,356</td>
<td>16.7</td>
<td>3,223</td>
<td>4.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Sex</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male</td>
<td>39,628</td>
<td>58.3</td>
<td>81</td>
<td>15.8</td>
<td>10,108</td>
<td>42.8</td>
<td>20,151</td>
<td>68.9</td>
<td>7,460</td>
<td>65.7</td>
<td>1,828</td>
<td>56.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Female</td>
<td>28,319</td>
<td>41.7</td>
<td>432</td>
<td>84.2</td>
<td>13,512</td>
<td>57.2</td>
<td>9,084</td>
<td>31.1</td>
<td>3,896</td>
<td>34.3</td>
<td>1,395</td>
<td>43.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Age (years)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;40</td>
<td>21,122</td>
<td>31.1</td>
<td>240</td>
<td>46.8</td>
<td>8,853</td>
<td>37.5</td>
<td>8,208</td>
<td>28.1</td>
<td>2,934</td>
<td>25.8</td>
<td>887</td>
<td>27.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>40-49</td>
<td>19,116</td>
<td>28.1</td>
<td>110</td>
<td>21.4</td>
<td>6,169</td>
<td>26.1</td>
<td>8,233</td>
<td>28.2</td>
<td>3,509</td>
<td>30.9</td>
<td>1,095</td>
<td>34.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>50-59</td>
<td>15,398</td>
<td>22.7</td>
<td>77</td>
<td>15.0</td>
<td>4,561</td>
<td>19.3</td>
<td>7,004</td>
<td>24.0</td>
<td>2,925</td>
<td>25.8</td>
<td>831</td>
<td>25.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>60-69</td>
<td>9,619</td>
<td>14.2</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>9.8</td>
<td>2,943</td>
<td>12.5</td>
<td>4,628</td>
<td>15.8</td>
<td>1,647</td>
<td>14.5</td>
<td>351</td>
<td>10.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>70+</td>
<td>2,692</td>
<td>4.0</td>
<td>36</td>
<td>7.0</td>
<td>1,094</td>
<td>4.6</td>
<td>1,162</td>
<td>4.0</td>
<td>341</td>
<td>3.0</td>
<td>59</td>
<td>1.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Race</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>White</td>
<td>65,150</td>
<td>98.0</td>
<td>491</td>
<td>98.0</td>
<td>22,836</td>
<td>98.6</td>
<td>28,038</td>
<td>98.1</td>
<td>10,761</td>
<td>97.1</td>
<td>3,024</td>
<td>95.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Other</td>
<td>1,338</td>
<td>2.0</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>2.0</td>
<td>319</td>
<td>1.4</td>
<td>554</td>
<td>1.9</td>
<td>322</td>
<td>2.9</td>
<td>133</td>
<td>4.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.24</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.0003</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Residence</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Iowa</td>
<td>45,158</td>
<td>66.5</td>
<td>281</td>
<td>54.8</td>
<td>15,708</td>
<td>66.5</td>
<td>19,569</td>
<td>66.9</td>
<td>7,508</td>
<td>66.1</td>
<td>2,092</td>
<td>64.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>North Carolina</td>
<td>22,789</td>
<td>33.5</td>
<td>232</td>
<td>45.2</td>
<td>7,912</td>
<td>33.5</td>
<td>9,666</td>
<td>33.1</td>
<td>3,848</td>
<td>33.9</td>
<td>1,131</td>
<td>36.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.29</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.11</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.20</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Participant type</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Private applicator</td>
<td>38,190</td>
<td>56.2</td>
<td>88</td>
<td>17.2</td>
<td>9,873</td>
<td>41.8</td>
<td>19,307</td>
<td>66.0</td>
<td>7,170</td>
<td>63.1</td>
<td>1,752</td>
<td>54.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Commercial applicator</td>
<td>2,325</td>
<td>3.4</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>2.0</td>
<td>671</td>
<td>2.8</td>
<td>1,103</td>
<td>3.8</td>
<td>422</td>
<td>3.7</td>
<td>119</td>
<td>3.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Spouse</td>
<td>27,432</td>
<td>40.4</td>
<td>415</td>
<td>80.9</td>
<td>13,076</td>
<td>55.4</td>
<td>8,825</td>
<td>30.2</td>
<td>3,764</td>
<td>33.2</td>
<td>1,352</td>
<td>41.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Education</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>High school or lower</td>
<td>32,722</td>
<td>51.9</td>
<td>201</td>
<td>43.0</td>
<td>10,077</td>
<td>46.4</td>
<td>14,846</td>
<td>54.3</td>
<td>5,904</td>
<td>56.0</td>
<td>1,694</td>
<td>57.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Greater than high school</td>
<td>30,284</td>
<td>48.1</td>
<td>267</td>
<td>57.1</td>
<td>11,620</td>
<td>53.6</td>
<td>12,488</td>
<td>45.7</td>
<td>4,645</td>
<td>44.0</td>
<td>1,264</td>
<td>42.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.13</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.004</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.17</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Smoking status</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Never</td>
<td>40,203</td>
<td>61.4</td>
<td>313</td>
<td>64.7</td>
<td>14,737</td>
<td>64.9</td>
<td>16,816</td>
<td>59.5</td>
<td>6,453</td>
<td>59.0</td>
<td>1,884</td>
<td>60.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Former</td>
<td>16,661</td>
<td>25.4</td>
<td>61</td>
<td>12.6</td>
<td>4,598</td>
<td>20.3</td>
<td>7,871</td>
<td>27.9</td>
<td>3,239</td>
<td>29.6</td>
<td>892</td>
<td>28.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Current</td>
<td>8,616</td>
<td>13.2</td>
<td>110</td>
<td>22.7</td>
<td>3,374</td>
<td>14.9</td>
<td>3,558</td>
<td>12.6</td>
<td>1,247</td>
<td>11.4</td>
<td>327</td>
<td>10.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.20</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Smoking pack-years</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>0</td>
<td>40,203</td>
<td>62.4</td>
<td>313</td>
<td>64.9</td>
<td>14,737</td>
<td>65.7</td>
<td>16,816</td>
<td>60.7</td>
<td>6,453</td>
<td>60.1</td>
<td>1,884</td>
<td>61.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1-12</td>
<td>13,287</td>
<td>20.6</td>
<td>95</td>
<td>19.7</td>
<td>4,438</td>
<td>19.8</td>
<td>5,872</td>
<td>21.2</td>
<td>2,269</td>
<td>21.1</td>
<td>613</td>
<td>20.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥13</td>
<td>10,927</td>
<td>17.0</td>
<td>74</td>
<td>15.4</td>
<td>3,265</td>
<td>14.6</td>
<td>5,016</td>
<td>18.1</td>
<td>2,017</td>
<td>18.8</td>
<td>555</td>
<td>18.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.88</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.30</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.25</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Number cigarettes per day</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>0</td>
<td>40,203</td>
<td>61.8</td>
<td>313</td>
<td>64.7</td>
<td>14,737</td>
<td>65.2</td>
<td>16,816</td>
<td>60.1</td>
<td>6,453</td>
<td>59.4</td>
<td>1,884</td>
<td>61.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≤10</td>
<td>7,953</td>
<td>12.2</td>
<td>59</td>
<td>12.2</td>
<td>2,810</td>
<td>12.4</td>
<td>3,442</td>
<td>12.3</td>
<td>1,300</td>
<td>12.0</td>
<td>342</td>
<td>11.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>11-20</td>
<td>10,010</td>
<td>15.4</td>
<td>81</td>
<td>16.7</td>
<td>3,327</td>
<td>14.7</td>
<td>4,553</td>
<td>16.3</td>
<td>1,645</td>
<td>15.2</td>
<td>404</td>
<td>13.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>21-40</td>
<td>5,859</td>
<td>9.0</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>6.0</td>
<td>1,558</td>
<td>6.9</td>
<td>2,709</td>
<td>9.7</td>
<td>1,217</td>
<td>11.2</td>
<td>346</td>
<td>11.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;40</td>
<td>982</td>
<td>1.5</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0.4</td>
<td>162</td>
<td>0.7</td>
<td>470</td>
<td>1.7</td>
<td>242</td>
<td>2.2</td>
<td>106</td>
<td>3.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.64</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.0001</td>
</tr>
</table>


<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1763" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 1 continued</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Characteristics</th>
<th colspan="2">Total</th>
<th colspan="2">Underweight (BMI &lt; 18.5 kg/m2)</th>
<th colspan="2">Normal Weight (BMI 18.5-24.9 kg/m2)</th>
<th colspan="2">Overweight (BMI 25-29.9 kg/m2)</th>
<th colspan="2">Obese I (BMI 30-34.9 kg/m2)</th>
<th colspan="2">Obese II + III (BMI ≥ 35 kg/m2)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">Alcohol drinking year prior enrollment</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td>24,681</td>
<td>38.3</td>
<td>230</td>
<td>47.6</td>
<td>8,691</td>
<td>38.6</td>
<td>10,292</td>
<td>37.2</td>
<td>4,183</td>
<td>39.0</td>
<td>1,285</td>
<td>42.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>39,813</td>
<td>61.7</td>
<td>253</td>
<td>52.4</td>
<td>13,856</td>
<td>61.5</td>
<td>17,384</td>
<td>62.8</td>
<td>6,551</td>
<td>61.0</td>
<td>1,769</td>
<td>57.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.01</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.002</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">Frequency of alcohol drinking year prior enrollment</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>None</td>
<td>24,681</td>
<td>38.3</td>
<td>230</td>
<td>47.6</td>
<td>8,691</td>
<td>38.6</td>
<td>10,292</td>
<td>37.2</td>
<td>4,183</td>
<td>39.0</td>
<td>1,285</td>
<td>42.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1-5</td>
<td>21,352</td>
<td>33.1</td>
<td>172</td>
<td>35.6</td>
<td>7,873</td>
<td>34.9</td>
<td>8,747</td>
<td>31.6</td>
<td>3,499</td>
<td>32.6</td>
<td>1,061</td>
<td>34.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥6</td>
<td>18,461</td>
<td>28.6</td>
<td>81</td>
<td>16.8</td>
<td>5,983</td>
<td>26.5</td>
<td>8,637</td>
<td>31.2</td>
<td>3,052</td>
<td>28.4</td>
<td>708</td>
<td>23.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.002</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Ever diagnosed with hypertension</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td>42,669</td>
<td>84.5</td>
<td>443</td>
<td>94.5</td>
<td>17,432</td>
<td>91.3</td>
<td>17,178</td>
<td>83.7</td>
<td>6,026</td>
<td>74.7</td>
<td>1,590</td>
<td>67.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>7,849</td>
<td>15.5</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>5.5</td>
<td>1,660</td>
<td>8.7</td>
<td>3,346</td>
<td>16.3</td>
<td>2,045</td>
<td>25.3</td>
<td>772</td>
<td>32.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.02</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ever diagnosed with diabetes</td>
<td colspan="3"></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td>63,437</td>
<td>96.6</td>
<td>481</td>
<td>98.0</td>
<td>22,421</td>
<td>98.1</td>
<td>27,338</td>
<td>96.8</td>
<td>10,357</td>
<td>94.6</td>
<td>2,840</td>
<td>91.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>2,202</td>
<td>3.4</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>2.0</td>
<td>423</td>
<td>1.9</td>
<td>907</td>
<td>3.2</td>
<td>596</td>
<td>5.4</td>
<td>266</td>
<td>8.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.76</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Family history of cancer</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td>38,429</td>
<td>56.6</td>
<td>317</td>
<td>61.8</td>
<td>13,278</td>
<td>56.2</td>
<td>16,651</td>
<td>57.0</td>
<td>6,368</td>
<td>56.1</td>
<td>1,815</td>
<td>56.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>29,518</td>
<td>43.4</td>
<td>196</td>
<td>38.2</td>
<td>10,342</td>
<td>43.8</td>
<td>12,584</td>
<td>43.0</td>
<td>4,988</td>
<td>43.9</td>
<td>1,408</td>
<td>43.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.01</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.09</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.11</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.81</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">Frequency of meat consumption year prior enrollment</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≤3 times per month or less</td>
<td>3,032</td>
<td>6.6</td>
<td>46</td>
<td>10.4</td>
<td>1,309</td>
<td>7.8</td>
<td>1,179</td>
<td>6.2</td>
<td>410</td>
<td>5.5</td>
<td>88</td>
<td>4.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1-2 times per week</td>
<td>23,055</td>
<td>50.1</td>
<td>228</td>
<td>51.7</td>
<td>8,899</td>
<td>52.7</td>
<td>9,518</td>
<td>49.9</td>
<td>3,439</td>
<td>46.0</td>
<td>971</td>
<td>45.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥3 times per week</td>
<td>19,931</td>
<td>43.3</td>
<td>167</td>
<td>37.9</td>
<td>6,676</td>
<td>39.5</td>
<td>8,364</td>
<td>43.9</td>
<td>3,628</td>
<td>48.5</td>
<td>1,096</td>
<td>50.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.11</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.04</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">Fruit consumption year prior enrollment (servings/day)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;1</td>
<td>37,401</td>
<td>62.1</td>
<td>270</td>
<td>59.3</td>
<td>11,796</td>
<td>57.8</td>
<td>16,952</td>
<td>64.5</td>
<td>6,609</td>
<td>64.8</td>
<td>1,774</td>
<td>62.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1-2</td>
<td>20,323</td>
<td>33.8</td>
<td>150</td>
<td>33.0</td>
<td>7,559</td>
<td>37.0</td>
<td>8,433</td>
<td>32.1</td>
<td>3,222</td>
<td>31.6</td>
<td>959</td>
<td>33.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥3</td>
<td>2,488</td>
<td>4.1</td>
<td>35</td>
<td>7.7</td>
<td>1,064</td>
<td>5.2</td>
<td>898</td>
<td>3.4</td>
<td>366</td>
<td>3.6</td>
<td>125</td>
<td>4.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.03</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.50</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.01</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">Vegetable consumption year prior enrollment (servings/day)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;1</td>
<td>26,255</td>
<td>43.7</td>
<td>187</td>
<td>41.1</td>
<td>8,264</td>
<td>40.6</td>
<td>11,985</td>
<td>45.7</td>
<td>4,612</td>
<td>45.3</td>
<td>1,207</td>
<td>42.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1-2</td>
<td>28.693</td>
<td>47.8</td>
<td>212</td>
<td>46.6</td>
<td>10,136</td>
<td>49.8</td>
<td>12,238</td>
<td>46.7</td>
<td>4,733</td>
<td>46.5</td>
<td>1,374</td>
<td>48.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥3</td>
<td>5,129</td>
<td>8.5</td>
<td>56</td>
<td>12.3</td>
<td>1,974</td>
<td>9.7</td>
<td>1,997</td>
<td>7.6</td>
<td>829</td>
<td>8.2</td>
<td>273</td>
<td>9.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.13</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.20</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.02</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">Vitamin or mineral supplements year prior enrollment</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td>25,002</td>
<td>54.9</td>
<td>187</td>
<td>43.0</td>
<td>8,064</td>
<td>48.2</td>
<td>10,908</td>
<td>56.0</td>
<td>4,560</td>
<td>61.5</td>
<td>1,283</td>
<td>60.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes, not regularly</td>
<td>8,270</td>
<td>18.2</td>
<td>85</td>
<td>19.5</td>
<td>3,275</td>
<td>19.6</td>
<td>3,290</td>
<td>17.5</td>
<td>1,258</td>
<td>17.0</td>
<td>362</td>
<td>16.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes, at least once/week</td>
<td>12,248</td>
<td>26.9</td>
<td>163</td>
<td>37.5</td>
<td>5,379</td>
<td>32.2</td>
<td>4,622</td>
<td>24.5</td>
<td>1,590</td>
<td>21.5</td>
<td>494</td>
<td>23.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.05</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.24</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">Strenuous leisure exercise (hours/week)b</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>0</td>
<td>10,391</td>
<td>22.7</td>
<td>128</td>
<td>29.3</td>
<td>3,431</td>
<td>20.4</td>
<td>4,339</td>
<td>22.0</td>
<td>1,893</td>
<td>25.5</td>
<td>600</td>
<td>27.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;0 and &lt;1</td>
<td>7,988</td>
<td>17.5</td>
<td>66</td>
<td>15.1</td>
<td>2,684</td>
<td>16.0</td>
<td>3,405</td>
<td>18.0</td>
<td>1,367</td>
<td>18.4</td>
<td>466</td>
<td>21.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1-2</td>
<td>8,270</td>
<td>18.1</td>
<td>81</td>
<td>18.5</td>
<td>3,106</td>
<td>18.5</td>
<td>3,429</td>
<td>18.1</td>
<td>1,299</td>
<td>17.5</td>
<td>355</td>
<td>16.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>3-5</td>
<td>10,241</td>
<td>22.4</td>
<td>80</td>
<td>18.3</td>
<td>4,214</td>
<td>25.1</td>
<td>4,030</td>
<td>21.3</td>
<td>1,533</td>
<td>20.6</td>
<td>384</td>
<td>17.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;5</td>
<td>8,842</td>
<td>19.3</td>
<td>82</td>
<td>18.8</td>
<td>3,370</td>
<td>20.1</td>
<td>3,701</td>
<td>19.6</td>
<td>1,346</td>
<td>18.1</td>
<td>343</td>
<td>16.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.0004</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.0001</td>
</tr>
</table>


<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1764" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 1 continued</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Characteristics</th>
<th colspan="2">Total</th>
<th colspan="2">Underweight (BMI &lt; 18.5 kg/m2)</th>
<th colspan="2">Normal Weight (BMI 18.5-24.9 kg/m2)</th>
<th colspan="2">Overweight (BMI 25-29.9 kg/m2)</th>
<th colspan="2">Obese I (BMI 30-34.9 kg/m2)</th>
<th colspan="2">Obese II + III (BMI ≥ 35 kg/m2)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>%</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">Lifetime pesticide use (days)"</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>0</td>
<td>11,947</td>
<td>19.7</td>
<td>206</td>
<td>46.7</td>
<td>5,750</td>
<td>27.8</td>
<td>3,763</td>
<td>14.2</td>
<td>1,635</td>
<td>16.0</td>
<td>593</td>
<td>20.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1-50</td>
<td>13,149</td>
<td>21.7</td>
<td>112</td>
<td>25.4</td>
<td>5,126</td>
<td>24.8</td>
<td>5,382</td>
<td>20.3</td>
<td>1,969</td>
<td>19.3</td>
<td>560</td>
<td>19.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>51-178</td>
<td>13,114</td>
<td>21.6</td>
<td>62</td>
<td>14.1</td>
<td>4,003</td>
<td>19.3</td>
<td>6,213</td>
<td>23.5</td>
<td>2,258</td>
<td>22.2</td>
<td>578</td>
<td>20.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>179-369</td>
<td>10,680</td>
<td>17.6</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>6.1</td>
<td>2,910</td>
<td>14.1</td>
<td>5,275</td>
<td>19.9</td>
<td>1,983</td>
<td>19.5</td>
<td>485</td>
<td>17.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥370</td>
<td>11,787</td>
<td>19.4</td>
<td>34</td>
<td>7.7</td>
<td>2,924</td>
<td>14.1</td>
<td>5,838</td>
<td>22.1</td>
<td>2,351</td>
<td>23.1</td>
<td>640</td>
<td>22.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4">Menopause statusª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Premenopausal</td>
<td>12,107</td>
<td>45.4</td>
<td>222</td>
<td>57.7</td>
<td>6,467</td>
<td>51.4</td>
<td>3,380</td>
<td>39.5</td>
<td>1,410</td>
<td>38.4</td>
<td>534</td>
<td>40.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Postmenopausal</td>
<td>14,584</td>
<td>54.6</td>
<td>163</td>
<td>42.3</td>
<td>6,117</td>
<td>48.6</td>
<td>5,166</td>
<td>60.5</td>
<td>2,261</td>
<td>61.6</td>
<td>779</td>
<td>59.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.02</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.24</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.15</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Parity</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>0</td>
<td>262</td>
<td>1.6</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>2.4</td>
<td>141</td>
<td>1.8</td>
<td>72</td>
<td>1.4</td>
<td>32</td>
<td>1.4</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1</td>
<td>1,922</td>
<td>11.5</td>
<td>55</td>
<td>21.7</td>
<td>1,015</td>
<td>12.7</td>
<td>516</td>
<td>9.6</td>
<td>234</td>
<td>10.2</td>
<td>102</td>
<td>12.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>2</td>
<td>5,989</td>
<td>35.9</td>
<td>100</td>
<td>39.4</td>
<td>3,066</td>
<td>38.5</td>
<td>1,833</td>
<td>34.3</td>
<td>722</td>
<td>31.4</td>
<td>268</td>
<td>32.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>3</td>
<td>4,802</td>
<td>28.7</td>
<td>61</td>
<td>24.0</td>
<td>2,236</td>
<td>28.1</td>
<td>1,601</td>
<td>29.9</td>
<td>675</td>
<td>29.3</td>
<td>229</td>
<td>27.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>4</td>
<td>2,293</td>
<td>13.7</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>8.3</td>
<td>981</td>
<td>12.3</td>
<td>785</td>
<td>14.7</td>
<td>380</td>
<td>16.5</td>
<td>126</td>
<td>15.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;4</td>
<td>1,438</td>
<td>8.6</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>4.3</td>
<td>529</td>
<td>6.6</td>
<td>544</td>
<td>10.2</td>
<td>259</td>
<td>11.3</td>
<td>95</td>
<td>11.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>p-valueª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.001</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;. 0001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.08</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.55</td>
</tr>
</table>

a Chi square p-value comparing distribution of underweight to normal weight, overweight to normal, moderate obese to overweight, and highly
obese to moderate obese, respectively

b Summer and winter exercise combined

" Includes any pesticide use

d Menopause status based on Phase II questionnaire data


vegetable consumption, exercise, and pack-years of cigarette
smoking. Among male never smokers, the association
between BMI (per 1 kg/m2) and lung cancer was null
(HR = 0.98, 95% CI = 0.86-1.11, p-trend = 0.70) adjust-
ing for state, however, there were only 21 men with lung
cancer who never smoked, thus risk estimates for this group
are unstable. The test of interaction between BMI and
smoking status was not statistically significant (p = 0.54). In
order to rule out the possibility of weight loss due to pre-
clinical disease, we restricted the cases of lung cancer among
ever smokers to those diagnosed 5 years after enrollment
and found that the statistically significant inverse associa-
tion with BMI remained (5 years: HR = 0.93; 95%
CI = 0.88-0.99, p-trend = 0.02).

Among women, we found statistically significant posi-
tive trend associations for BMI and all cancer sites com-
bined (HR = 1.02, 95% CI = 1.01-1.04; p-trend = 0.002)
adjusting for smoking status, hypertension, taking vitamin
supplements, and parity, and specifically for postmeno-
pausal breast cancer (HR = 1.03, 95% CI = 1.01-1.05;
p-trend = 0.02) adjusting for diabetes, vitamin supple-
ment, parity, and family history of breast cancer. For breast
cancer, overweight postmenopausal women had a 1.22-fold

(95% CI 0.93-1.60), obese I a 1.62-fold (95% CI
1.17-2.24), and obese II/III a 1.07-fold (95% CI 0.61-1.87)
risk compared to normal weight postmenopausal women.
To explore the null association for breast cancer in obese
II/III women, we compared the frequency of the factors in
Table 1 between the obese I and II postmenopausal women
using the chi-square test and found that only alcohol con-
sumption was significantly different (p = 0.02), with 50%
of the obese II versus 26% of the obese I women ever
drinking alcohol. Stratifying by alcohol consumption, the
test for trend for BMI and breast cancer among postmen-
opausal women was statistically significant among
those who never drank alcohol (HR = 1.05, 95% CI =
1.02-1.08, p-trend = 0.003), but not among those who
drank alcohol (HR = 1.00, 95% CI = 0.95-1.04, p-trend =
0.85). The test for interaction between BMI and alcohol
drinking was statistically significant (p-interaction = 0.01).
In addition to breast cancer, women with higher BMI had
increased, but not statistically significant, risks of pancreatic
and kidney cancers, and melanoma. BMI was not associated
with colon cancer in women (HR = 1.00, 95% CI 0.96-1.04,
p-trend = 0.92). The risk of lung cancer decreased with
increasing BMI, but the test of trend was not statistically

<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1765" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 2 Hazard rate ratio (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for cancers in relation to BMI at enrollment by sex</caption>
<tr>
<th>Cancer</th>
<th>Men</th>
<th colspan="3"></th>
<th colspan="4">Women</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>BMI (kg/m2)</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>HRª</th>
<th colspan="2">95% CIª</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>HRª</th>
<th>95% CIª</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>All cancersb</td>
<td>2,955</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>1,477</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>0.98</td>
<td>0.52-1.84</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>724</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">Ref</td>
<td>608</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>1,559</td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td colspan="2">0.95-1.19</td>
<td>516</td>
<td>1.14</td>
<td>0.89-1.33</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>556</td>
<td>1.04</td>
<td colspan="2">0.90-1.20</td>
<td>240</td>
<td>1.28</td>
<td>1.05-1.56</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>112</td>
<td>1.12</td>
<td colspan="2">0.87-1.45</td>
<td>93</td>
<td>1.36</td>
<td>1.01-1.82</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.01</td>
<td colspan="2">0.99-1.02 0.24</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.02</td>
<td>1.01-1.04</td>
<td>0.002</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Oral, Larynx, Pharynx℃</td>
<td>74</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">Ref</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>61</td>
<td>1.30</td>
<td colspan="2">0.79-2.13</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.35</td>
<td>0.43-4.21</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>0.69</td>
<td colspan="2">0.34-1.44</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.97</td>
<td colspan="2">0.92-1.02 0.25</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>0.89-1.11</td>
<td>0.93</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Lungd</td>
<td>261</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>96</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0 -</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>86</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">Ref</td>
<td>47</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>127</td>
<td>0.85</td>
<td colspan="2">0.60-1.20</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>0.99</td>
<td>0.63-1.55</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>40</td>
<td>0.85</td>
<td colspan="2">0.54-1.35</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0.67</td>
<td>0.33-1.38</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>0.47</td>
<td>0.15-1.49</td>
<td></td>
<td>4</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.97</td>
<td colspan="2">0.93-1.01 0.15</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.98</td>
<td>0.94-1.03</td>
<td>0.51</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Lung (Ever smokers)e</td>
<td>228</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td>64</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>78</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">Ref</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>108</td>
<td>0.62</td>
<td colspan="2">0.43-0.90</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>1.01</td>
<td>0.58-1.75</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>35</td>
<td>0.56</td>
<td colspan="2">0.35-0.92</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.87</td>
<td>0.40-1.90</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>0.22</td>
<td>0.05-0.90</td>
<td></td>
<td>3</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.92</td>
<td>0.88-0.97</td>
<td>0.001</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.99</td>
<td>0.94-1.05</td>
<td>0.70</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Lung (Never smokers)f</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">Ref</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>2.03</td>
<td colspan="2">0.66-6.24</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>0.74</td>
<td>0.35-1.59</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.98</td>
<td>0.86-1.11</td>
<td>0.70</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.92</td>
<td>0.84-1.01</td>
<td>0.09</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Thyroid®</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>38</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">Ref</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>0.92</td>
<td colspan="2">0.38-2.20</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>1.71</td>
<td>0.82-3.57</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1.08</td>
<td>0.38-3.09</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.94</td>
<td>0.85-1.05</td>
<td>0.29</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.04</td>
<td>0.98-1.11</td>
<td>0.16</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Esophagush</td>
<td>39</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">Ref</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>2.09</td>
<td colspan="2">0.84-5.15</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">–</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1766" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 2 continued</caption>
<tr>
<th>Cancer</th>
<th>Men</th>
<th colspan="3"></th>
<th colspan="4">Women</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>BMI (kg/m2)</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>HRª</th>
<th>95% CIª</th>
<th></th>
<th>n</th>
<th>HRª</th>
<th>95% CIª</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.01</td>
<td>0.94-1.10</td>
<td>0.73</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Stomachi</td>
<td>41</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>13</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>5</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>0.96</td>
<td>0.44-2.10</td>
<td></td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1.38</td>
<td>0.42-4.53</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.61</td>
<td>0.66-3.91</td>
<td></td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.07</td>
<td>0.99-1.14</td>
<td>0.06</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.95</td>
<td>0.83-1.08</td>
<td>0.41</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pancreatic'</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>21</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>1.11</td>
<td>0.54-2.27</td>
<td></td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.30</td>
<td>0.43-3.90</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td>0.42-2.65</td>
<td></td>
<td>6</td>
<td>2.48</td>
<td>0.79-7.83</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>2</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.99</td>
<td>0.92-1.07</td>
<td>0.83</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td>0.98-1.15</td>
<td>0.15</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Kidneyk</td>
<td>78</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>28</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>35</td>
<td>0.66</td>
<td>0.33-1.30</td>
<td></td>
<td>6</td>
<td>0.51</td>
<td>0.18-1.50</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>0.72</td>
<td>0.31-1.70</td>
<td></td>
<td>11</td>
<td>2.30</td>
<td>0.96-5.49</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>0.93-1.08</td>
<td>0.91</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.02</td>
<td>0.95-1.10</td>
<td>0.61</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Bladderl</td>
<td>131</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>17</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>34</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>66</td>
<td>1.16</td>
<td>0.75-1.81</td>
<td></td>
<td>6</td>
<td>0.97</td>
<td>0.32-2.89</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>1.41</td>
<td>0.82-2.41</td>
<td></td>
<td>2</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.01</td>
<td>0.96-1.05</td>
<td>0.82</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.93</td>
<td>0.83-1.05</td>
<td>0.23</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Prostate™</td>
<td>1,274</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>308</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>696</td>
<td>1.05</td>
<td>0.92-1.21</td>
<td></td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>226</td>
<td>0.99</td>
<td>0.83-1.18</td>
<td></td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>44</td>
<td>0.91</td>
<td>0.66-1.26</td>
<td></td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>0.98-1.01</td>
<td>0.65</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Colon"</td>
<td>230</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>113</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>44</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>40</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>112</td>
<td>1.25</td>
<td>0.85-1.85</td>
<td></td>
<td>49</td>
<td>1.48</td>
<td>0.97-2.26</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>58</td>
<td>1.88</td>
<td>1.22-2.91</td>
<td></td>
<td>19</td>
<td>1.36</td>
<td>0.79-2.36</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>2.03</td>
<td>1.05-3.93</td>
<td></td>
<td>4</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.05</td>
<td>1.02-1.09</td>
<td>0.005</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>0.96-1.04</td>
<td>0.92</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Rectalº</td>
<td>102</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>34</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>15</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1767" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 2 continued</caption>
<tr>
<th>Cancer</th>
<th colspan="4">Men</th>
<th colspan="4">Women</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>BMI (kg/m2)</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>HRª</th>
<th>95% CIª</th>
<th></th>
<th>n</th>
<th>HRª</th>
<th>95% CIª</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>53</td>
<td>0.96</td>
<td>0.51-1.82</td>
<td></td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0.82</td>
<td>0.35-1.90</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>0.60</td>
<td>0.24-1.50</td>
<td></td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1.09</td>
<td>0.39-3.05</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>3.21</td>
<td>1.34-7.71</td>
<td></td>
<td>3</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td>1.00-1.12</td>
<td>0.06</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.03</td>
<td>0.96-1.11</td>
<td>0.35</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LeukemiaP</td>
<td>94</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>26</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>52</td>
<td>1.21</td>
<td>0.64-2.30</td>
<td></td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0.93</td>
<td>0.39-2.20</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>1.38</td>
<td>0.64-2.97</td>
<td></td>
<td>2</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>0.94-1.07</td>
<td>0.99</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.93</td>
<td>0.84-1.02</td>
<td>0.13</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Non-Hodgkin lymphomaª</td>
<td>131</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>63</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>2</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>31</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>27</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>73</td>
<td>1.24</td>
<td>0.69-2.21</td>
<td></td>
<td>25</td>
<td>1.07</td>
<td>0.62-1.86</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>1.27</td>
<td>0.63-2.60</td>
<td></td>
<td>6</td>
<td>0.64</td>
<td>0.26-1.55</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>3</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.02</td>
<td>0.96-1.08</td>
<td>0.61</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.98</td>
<td>0.93-1.04</td>
<td>0.52</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Multiple myeloma"</td>
<td>47</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>21</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>1.18</td>
<td>0.48-2.89</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.17</td>
<td>0.43-3.12</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.35</td>
<td>0.45-4.06</td>
<td></td>
<td>2</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>1</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.02</td>
<td>0.93-1.12</td>
<td>0.64</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.98</td>
<td>0.89-1.08</td>
<td>0.71</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Melanomas</td>
<td>125</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>79</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>0</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>34</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>38</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>60</td>
<td>0.65</td>
<td>0.39-1.09</td>
<td></td>
<td>21</td>
<td>0.84</td>
<td>0.49-1.44</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>0.97</td>
<td>0.53-1.76</td>
<td></td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1.23</td>
<td>0.65-2.31</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.89</td>
<td>0.84-4.26</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.01</td>
<td>0.95-1.06</td>
<td>0.86</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.03</td>
<td>0.99-1.08</td>
<td>0.14</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Breast (Female)'</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>622</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>6</td>
<td>0.92</td>
<td>0.80-1.04</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>274</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>205</td>
<td>0.99</td>
<td>0.81-1.21</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>106</td>
<td>1.22</td>
<td>0.95-1.56</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>31</td>
<td>0.79</td>
<td>0.50-1.25</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>0.99-1.02</td>
<td>0.71</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Breast"</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>464</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>(Postmenopausal female)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>5</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>186</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>156</td>
<td>1.22</td>
<td>0.93-1.60</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>93</td>
<td>1.62</td>
<td>1.17-2.24</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>–</td>
<td></td>
<td>24</td>
<td>1.07</td>
<td>0.61-1.87</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>1.03</td>
<td>1.01-1.05</td>
<td>0.02</td>
</tr>
</table>


<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1768" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 2 continued</caption>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">Cancer Men Women</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>BMI (kg/m2)</th>
<th>n HRª</th>
<th>95% CIª</th>
<th>n HRª</th>
<th>95% CIª</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ovarian</td>
<td>– –</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>48 –</td>
<td>–</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;18.5</td>
<td>– –</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>1 –</td>
<td>–</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18.5-24.9</td>
<td>– –</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">19 1.00 Ref</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>– –</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">21 1.44 0.78-2.67</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>30-34.9</td>
<td>– –</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>5 0.48</td>
<td>0.14-1.63</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥35</td>
<td>– –</td>
<td>–</td>
<td colspan="2">2 – –</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.98</td>
<td>0.92-1.05 0.58</td>
</tr>
</table>

a Based on Cox regression using age as time-dependent variable; trend test calculated with continuous BMI; models adjusted for: b Men: race,
smoking status, vegetable consumption, exercise, family history of cancer; Women: smoking status, hypertension, vitamin supplements, parity;
" Men: smoking status, fruit consumption; Women: smoking status; dMen: state, race, smoking status, vegetable consumption, exercise;
Women: smoking status; e Men: state, race, vegetable consumption, exercise, pack-years of cigarette smoking; Women: pack-years of cigarette
smoking; " Men: state; Women: state; & Men: family history of cancer; Women: hypertension; h Men: smoking status; ‘ Men: smoking status;
Men: diabetes; Women: race; k Men: hypertension, family history of cancer; Women: hypertension; 1 Men: smoking status, alcohol drinking;
Women: exercise; " Men: race, smoking status, exercise, family history of prostate cancer; " Men: race, education, family history colon cancer;
° Men: meat consumption; P Men: state, education, diabetes, exercise; Women: vitamin supplements; 4 Men: vitamin supplements, exercise;
" Men: race, meat consumption; $ Men: diabetes, wear sunscreen; " Women: diabetes, meat consumption, family history of breast cancer;
" Women: diabetes, vitamin supplement, parity, family history of breast cancer


significant for all women, for ever smokers, or for those
diagnosed 5 years after enrollment.

For the interaction between pesticide use and BMI on
colon cancer risk in men, we evaluated 22 pesticides that
were used by at least 10% of the male study population and
for which there were at least five cancer cases in each BMI
group, as well as any organochlorine or organophosphate
insecticide (Table 3). Of the 22 pesticides examined,
carbofuran and metolachlor had statistically significant
(p ≤ 0.05) modifying effects. Specifically, BMI was
positively associated with colon cancer among male users
of carbofuran (HR = 1.10, 95% CI 1.04-1.17, p-trend =
0.002), but not among non-users of carbofuran (HR = 1.02,
95% CI 0.97-1.06, p-trend = 0.52) (p-interaction = 0.04).
BMI was positively associated with colon cancer among
male users of metolachlor (HR = 1.09, 95% CI 1.04-1.15,
p-trend = 0.001), but not among non-users of metolachlor
(HR = 1.01, 95% CI 0.96-1.06, p-trend = 0.70) (p-inter-
action = 0.02). There was a borderline statistically signif-
icant modifying effect of alachlor (p-interaction = 0.07),
with BMI positively associated with colon cancer among
male users of alachlor (HR = 1.08, 95% CI 1.02-1.13, p-
trend = 0.002), but not among non-users of alachlor
(HR = 1.01, 95% CI 0.95-1.06, p-trend = 0.87). Since
applicators often use more than one pesticide, we examined
possible confounding by use of multiple pesticides. First,
we examined the correlation between never/ever use of
carbofuran, metolachlor, and alachlor among male partici-
pants and found that they were not highly correlated
(r: metolachlor and alachlor = 0.31; metolachlor and car-
bofuran = 0.18, alachlor and carbofuran = 0.26). When

we further adjusted for use of multiple pesticides (i.e.,
carbofuran, metolachlor, or alachlor), the associations we
reported did not measurably change. We also examined the
associations between these pesticides and colon cancer risk
stratifying by BMI and found that ever use compared to
never use of carbofuran, metolachlor, and alachlor was
associated with increased risks of colon cancer in obese
men (not statistically significant), but not in normal or
overweight men (Supplemental Table 1).

We did not find statistically significant modifying effects
of the other pesticides examined with BMI on colon cancer
risk among men. However, we did observe significant
positive associations between BMI and colon cancer among
men who used DDT, fonofos, malathion, carbaryl, per-
methrin, atrazine, cyanazine, trifluralin, EPTC, imazethapyr,
glyphosate, and as a class, organochlorines or organophos-
phates, while the associations among non-users of these
pesticides were not statistically significant. We observed
significant positive associations between BMI and colon
cancer among men who did not use terbufos, chlorpyrifos,
metribuzin, pendimethalin, chlorimuron-ethyl, and methyl
bromide, while the associations among users of these pesti-
cides were not statistically significant (Table 3).

We examined the interactions between pesticide use and
BMI on the risks of lung, bladder, prostate, and rectal
cancers, and NHL and melanoma in men, as well as breast
and colon cancers in women. Among male ever smokers,
we found that the inverse association between BMI and lung
cancer was statistically significant among non-users of
carbofuran (HR = 0.87, 95% CI = 0.82-0.92, p-trend <
0.0001), but not among users of carbofuran (HR = 1.01,

<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1769" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 3 Hazard rate ratio (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for colon cancer in relation to BMI at enrollment by ever/never use of pesticides among men</caption>
<tr>
<th>BMI (kg/m2)</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>HRª</th>
<th>95% CIª</th>
<th></th>
<th>n</th>
<th>HRª</th>
<th>95% CIª</th>
<th></th>
<th>p-interaction b</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Insecticide</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Organochlorines</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Organochlorine</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Organochlorine℃</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>41</td>
<td>2.20</td>
<td>0.97-4.99</td>
<td></td>
<td>37</td>
<td>1.33</td>
<td>0.67-2.63</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>2.39</td>
<td>0.98-5.85</td>
<td></td>
<td>26</td>
<td>2.11</td>
<td>1.02-4.38</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.05</td>
<td>0.99-1.12</td>
<td>0.14</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.07</td>
<td>1.01-1.13</td>
<td>0.02</td>
<td>0.52</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No DDT</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>DDTe</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>52</td>
<td>2.09</td>
<td>1.02-4.31</td>
<td></td>
<td>24</td>
<td>1.12</td>
<td>0.52-2.44</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>2.29</td>
<td>1.04-5.06</td>
<td></td>
<td>18</td>
<td>2.01</td>
<td>0.89-4.56</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.05</td>
<td>0.99-1.10</td>
<td>0.11</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.08</td>
<td>1.01-1.15</td>
<td>0.02</td>
<td>0.50</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Organophosphates</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">No Organophosphate</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Organophosphated</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>28</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>1.24</td>
<td>0.61-2.52</td>
<td></td>
<td>79</td>
<td>1.29</td>
<td>0.81-2.06</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>1.78</td>
<td>0.82-3.87</td>
<td></td>
<td>53</td>
<td>2.02</td>
<td>1.23-3.32</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.03</td>
<td>0.97-1.10</td>
<td>0.37</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td>1.02-1.10</td>
<td>0.004</td>
<td>0.47</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Terbufos</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Terbufos</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>61</td>
<td>1.20</td>
<td>0.74-1.96</td>
<td></td>
<td>33</td>
<td>1.77</td>
<td>0.78-4.02</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>40</td>
<td>1.85</td>
<td>1.09-3.14</td>
<td></td>
<td>21</td>
<td>2.32</td>
<td>0.97-5.55</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.05</td>
<td>1.00-1.09</td>
<td>0.04</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.05</td>
<td>0.99-1.12</td>
<td>0.13</td>
<td>0.94</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Fonofos</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Fonofos</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>31</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>69</td>
<td>1.22</td>
<td>0.76-1.94</td>
<td></td>
<td>26</td>
<td>1.23</td>
<td>0.54-2.78</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>42</td>
<td>1.60</td>
<td>0.96-2.67</td>
<td></td>
<td>21</td>
<td>2.36</td>
<td>1.02-5.46</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.04</td>
<td>0.99-1.08</td>
<td>0.10</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.07</td>
<td>1.00-1.14</td>
<td>0.06</td>
<td>0.59</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Chlorpyrifos</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Chlorpyrifos</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>17</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>74</td>
<td>1.64</td>
<td>0.98-2.73</td>
<td></td>
<td>32</td>
<td>0.86</td>
<td>0.46-1.63</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>40</td>
<td>1.97</td>
<td>1.12-3.46</td>
<td></td>
<td>30</td>
<td>1.86</td>
<td>0.98-3.54</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.05</td>
<td>1.01-1.10</td>
<td>0.01</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.04</td>
<td>0.98-1.11</td>
<td>0.17</td>
<td>0.61</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Malathion</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Malathione</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>1.70</td>
<td>0.74-3.92</td>
<td></td>
<td>43</td>
<td>1.52</td>
<td>0.78-2.99</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>2.22</td>
<td>0.90-5.46</td>
<td></td>
<td>25</td>
<td>2.07</td>
<td>1.00-4.29</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td>0.99-1.13</td>
<td>0.09</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td>1.00-1.12</td>
<td>0.05</td>
<td>0.88</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Dichlorvos</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Dichlorvos</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>82</td>
<td>1.33</td>
<td>0.86-2.07</td>
<td></td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0.69</td>
<td>0.24-1.98</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>1.72</td>
<td>1.06-2.78</td>
<td></td>
<td>11</td>
<td>2.03</td>
<td>0.72-5.73</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.03</td>
<td>0.99-1.07</td>
<td>0.11</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.09</td>
<td>0.99-1.20</td>
<td>0.08</td>
<td>0.47</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Carbamate</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Carbofuran</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Carbofuran</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>31</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>66</td>
<td>1.13</td>
<td>0.71-1.78</td>
<td></td>
<td>28</td>
<td>1.80</td>
<td>0.73-4.43</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>38</td>
<td>1.38</td>
<td>0.82-2.30</td>
<td></td>
<td>24</td>
<td>3.68</td>
<td>1.46-9.26</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1770" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 3 continued</caption>
<tr>
<th>BMI (kg/m2)</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>HRª</th>
<th>95% CIª</th>
<th></th>
<th>n</th>
<th>HRª</th>
<th>95% CIª</th>
<th></th>
<th>p-interaction b</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.02</td>
<td>0.97-1.06</td>
<td>0.52</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.10</td>
<td>1.04-1.17</td>
<td>0.002</td>
<td>0.04</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Carbaryl</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Carbaryle</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>1.60</td>
<td>0.80-3.23</td>
<td></td>
<td>31</td>
<td>1.61</td>
<td>0.73-3.55</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>1.87</td>
<td>0.87-4.03</td>
<td></td>
<td>22</td>
<td>2.50</td>
<td>1.08-5.79</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.04</td>
<td>0.99-1.11</td>
<td>0.14</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.08</td>
<td>1.01-1.14</td>
<td>0.02</td>
<td>0.43</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pyrethroid</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Permethrin</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="3">Permethrin (crops or animal)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>78</td>
<td>1.22</td>
<td>0.79-1.89</td>
<td></td>
<td>21</td>
<td>1.34</td>
<td>0.53-3.37</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>47</td>
<td>1.63</td>
<td>1.01-2.64</td>
<td></td>
<td>19</td>
<td>2.70</td>
<td>1.05-6.96</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.04</td>
<td>0.99-1.08</td>
<td>0.09</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.08</td>
<td>1.01-1.15</td>
<td>0.02</td>
<td>0.21</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Herbicide</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Triazine</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Atrazine</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>Atrazine</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>24</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>35</td>
<td>1.11</td>
<td>0.59-2.09</td>
<td></td>
<td>69</td>
<td>1.38</td>
<td>0.83-2.30</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>1.05</td>
<td>0.48-2.29</td>
<td></td>
<td>58</td>
<td>2.61</td>
<td>1.55-4.40</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.02</td>
<td>0.95-1.08</td>
<td>0.64</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.07</td>
<td>1.03-1.12</td>
<td>0.001</td>
<td>0.33</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Cyanazine</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Cyanazine</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>14</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>58</td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td>0.65-1.73</td>
<td></td>
<td>37</td>
<td>1.34</td>
<td>0.68-2.65</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>1.34</td>
<td>0.78- 2.32</td>
<td></td>
<td>31</td>
<td>2.54</td>
<td>1.26-5.11</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.03</td>
<td>0.99-1.08</td>
<td>0.16</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.05</td>
<td>1.00-1.11</td>
<td>0.06</td>
<td>0.70</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Metribuzin</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Metribuzine</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>55</td>
<td>2.00</td>
<td>1.03-3.86</td>
<td></td>
<td>23</td>
<td>1.34</td>
<td>0.54-3.33</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>32</td>
<td>2.70</td>
<td>1.33- 5.47</td>
<td></td>
<td>12</td>
<td>1.41</td>
<td>0.50-3.96</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.08</td>
<td>1.03-1.13</td>
<td>0.002</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>0.91-1.09</td>
<td>0.95</td>
<td>0.12</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Chloroacetanilide</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Metolachlor</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Metolachor</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>12</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>57</td>
<td>1.09</td>
<td>0.67-1.77</td>
<td></td>
<td>36</td>
<td>1.39</td>
<td>0.68-2.83</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>31</td>
<td>1.29</td>
<td>0.74-2.25</td>
<td></td>
<td>35</td>
<td>2.91</td>
<td>1.42-5.96</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.01</td>
<td>0.96-1.06</td>
<td>0.70</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.09</td>
<td>1.04-1.15</td>
<td>0.001</td>
<td>0.02</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Alachlor</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Alachlor</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>14</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>40</td>
<td>0.87</td>
<td>0.51-1.48</td>
<td></td>
<td>53</td>
<td>1.92</td>
<td>1.00-3.68</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>1.14</td>
<td>0.62-2.11</td>
<td></td>
<td>41</td>
<td>3.12</td>
<td>1.59-6.12</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.01</td>
<td>0.95-1.06</td>
<td>0.87</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.08</td>
<td>1.03-1.13</td>
<td>0.002</td>
<td>0.07</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dinotroaniline</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Pendimethalin</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Pendimethaline</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>57</td>
<td>2.28</td>
<td>1.15-4.51</td>
<td></td>
<td>20</td>
<td>0.97</td>
<td>0.40-2.36</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>2.88</td>
<td>1.38-6.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>15</td>
<td>1.32</td>
<td>0.50-3.49</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td>1.01-1.11</td>
<td>0.02</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td>0.98-1.14</td>
<td>0.17</td>
<td>0.95</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Trifluralin</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Trifluralin</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>16</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1771" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 3 continued</caption>
<tr>
<th>BMI (kg/m2)</th>
<th>n</th>
<th>HRª</th>
<th>95% CIª</th>
<th></th>
<th>n</th>
<th>HRª</th>
<th>95% CIª</th>
<th></th>
<th>p-interaction b</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>46</td>
<td>1.34</td>
<td>0.75-2.39</td>
<td></td>
<td>49</td>
<td>1.37</td>
<td>0.75-2.50</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>1.36</td>
<td>0.70-2.66</td>
<td></td>
<td>43</td>
<td>2.59</td>
<td>1.40-4.80</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.03</td>
<td>0.98-1.09</td>
<td>0.30</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.07</td>
<td>1.02-1.12</td>
<td>0.01</td>
<td>0.38</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Thiocarbamate</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No EPTC</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>EPTC</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>32</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>73</td>
<td>1.21</td>
<td>0.77-1.89</td>
<td></td>
<td>19</td>
<td>1.25</td>
<td>0.49-3.22</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>47</td>
<td>1.64</td>
<td>1.00-2.68</td>
<td></td>
<td>16</td>
<td>2.67</td>
<td>1.01-7.08</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.03</td>
<td>0.99-1.08</td>
<td>0.14</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.09</td>
<td>1.01-1.17</td>
<td>0.02</td>
<td>0.38</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Imidazolinone</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Imazethapyr</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Imazethapyr</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>56</td>
<td>1.15</td>
<td>0.71-1.87</td>
<td></td>
<td>37</td>
<td>1.40</td>
<td>0.67-2.93</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>38</td>
<td>1.66</td>
<td>0.97-2.84</td>
<td></td>
<td>28</td>
<td>2.25</td>
<td>1.05-4.81</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.04</td>
<td>0.99-1.09</td>
<td>0.09</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td>1.00-1.12</td>
<td>0.07</td>
<td>0.59</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Phosphinic</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Glyphosate</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Glyphosate</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>34</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>1.03</td>
<td>0.49-2.19</td>
<td></td>
<td>81</td>
<td>1.35</td>
<td>0.85-2.13</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>1.46</td>
<td>0.64-3.31</td>
<td></td>
<td>53</td>
<td>2.07</td>
<td>1.27- 3.37</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>0.92-1.07</td>
<td>0.92</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.07</td>
<td>1.03-1.11</td>
<td>0.001</td>
<td>0.13</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Urea</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4">No Chlorimuron-ethyl</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Chlorimuron-ethyle</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>5</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>54</td>
<td>1.74</td>
<td>0.92-3.29</td>
<td></td>
<td>24</td>
<td>1.74</td>
<td>0.66-4.65</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>1.88</td>
<td>0.92-3.83</td>
<td></td>
<td>18</td>
<td>2.79</td>
<td>1.01-7.75</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td>1.01-1.12</td>
<td>0.03</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.05</td>
<td>0.98-1.13</td>
<td>0.18</td>
<td>0.89</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Benzoic</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Dicamba</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Dicamba</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>17</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>1.26</td>
<td>0.72-2.19</td>
<td></td>
<td>49</td>
<td>1.14</td>
<td>0.63-2.06</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>35</td>
<td>1.92</td>
<td>1.05-3.50</td>
<td></td>
<td>30</td>
<td>1.73</td>
<td>0.92-3.24</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.04</td>
<td>0.99-1.09</td>
<td>0.11</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.05</td>
<td>0.99-1.10</td>
<td>0.09</td>
<td>0.92</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fumigant</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">No Methyl Bromide</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Methyl Bromide</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;25</td>
<td>34</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>Ref</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>25-29.9</td>
<td>88</td>
<td>1.38</td>
<td>0.89-2.15</td>
<td></td>
<td>17</td>
<td>0.80</td>
<td>0.33-1.91</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥30</td>
<td>57</td>
<td>1.98</td>
<td>1.23-3.20</td>
<td></td>
<td>14</td>
<td>1.72</td>
<td>0.70-4.21</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Trendª</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.05</td>
<td>1.01-1.09</td>
<td>0.02</td>
<td></td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td>0.98-1.14</td>
<td>0.14</td>
<td>0.85</td>
</tr>
</table>

a Based on Cox regression using age as time-dependent variable; test of trend calculated using continuous BMI; models adjusted for race,
education, family history colon cancer

b Interaction calculated using never/ever pesticide use and continuous BMI

" Used at least one of the following: Lindane, Aldrin, Chlordane, Dieldrin, DDT, Heptachlor, Toxaphene

d Used at least one of the following: Terbufos, Fonofos, Trichlorfon, Chlorpyrifos, Malathion, Parathion, Diazinon, Phorate, Coumaphos,
Dichlorvos

e Data available from take-home questionnaire only


<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1772" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->

95% CI = 0.93-1.09; p-trend = 0.77) (p-interaction =
0.02). Among postmenopausal women, the positive asso-
ciation between BMI and breast cancer was statistically
significant in women who did not use malathion, diazinon,
or any organochlorine or organophosphate insecticide,
while the associations among users of these pesticides were
not statistically significant. The tests of interaction between
BMI and pesticide use on postmenopausal breast cancer
were not statistically significant (Supplemental Table 2).
We did not find any other statistically significant modifying
effects on any of the other associations examined.


## Discussion

In our AHS population of US farmers and their spouses and
commercial pesticide applicators, 64% were overweight or
obese, which is comparable to the frequency reported in the
non-Hispanic white US population; however, in our pop-
ulation the frequency of overweight was higher (43%) and
the frequency of obesity was lower (21%) than the US
population, where 33% are overweight and 31% are obese
[26]. The frequency of overweight and obesity in our
population was similar to that reported in an Austrian
farming population where 43% were overweight and 15%
obese [27]. The mean BMI in our study population
(27.6 kg/m2) is very close to the mean BMI reported in
New York dairy farmers (26.9 kg/m2) [28].

Consistent with previous studies, we found a significant
positive association between BMI and colon cancer among
men [3, 29-31]. This association was not significantly
modified by diet (meat, fruit, vegetable consumption) or
leisure-time exercise, which is in agreement with a previ-
ous study of male health professionals that showed an
association between BMI and colon cancer independent of
physical activity [32]. We found no association between
BMI and colon cancer among women, which has been
previously observed and attributed to waist size being
a stronger predictor of colon cancer than BMI in women
[29, 30].

We found that the positive association between BMI and
colon cancer in men was significant among users of car-
bofuran, metolachlor, and alachlor, but not among non-
users of these pesticides. These findings suggest that these
pesticides may modify the carcinogenic effect of obesity,
although the current understanding of the mechanisms in
humans is limited. Obesity has been suggested to contrib-
ute to colon cancer via increased leptin that is linked to
growth of colonic epithelial cells [33] and increased insu-
lin-like growth factor (IGF) that promotes tumor growth
[34]. Carbofuran is a carbamate insecticide that inhibits
cholinesterase and has been shown to generate reactive
oxygen species and induce lipid peroxidation [35], and

metolachlor and alachlor are chloroacetanilide herbicides
that have a chlorinated amide chemical structure [36].
None of these three pesticides are considered lipophilic
on the basis of the n-octanol/water partition coefficient
(Kow: carbofuran = 1.3, metolachlor = 3.5, alachlor =
2.9) [36], suggesting that lipophilicity is not a necessary
factor for the modification of the BMI and colon cancer
associations. Based on US EPA guidelines, carbofuran is a
"not likely' carcinogen [37], metolachlor is a "possible"
carcinogen [38], and alachlor is a "likely" human carcin-
ogen at high doses, but a "not likely' carcinogen at low
doses [39]. In addition, none of these pesticides have been
linked to colon cancer in the AHS [40-42] or reported in
other populations. The effect of these pesticides on obesity
has not been reported. We found that users of carbofuran,
metolachlor, alachlor had slightly higher and statistically
significant mean BMIs than non-users, adjusting for age,
sex, and education, providing some evidence that the
metabolism of these pesticides may be linked to obesity-
related factors.

We observed that men who used 11 other pesticides
[insecticides: carbaryl (carbamate), fonofos and malathion
(organophosphates), DDT (organochlorine), permethrin
(pyrethroid)]; herbicides: atrazine and cyanazine (triazine),
trifluralin (dinitroanaline), EPTC (thiocarbamate), imaz-
ethapyr (imidazolinone), glyphosate (phosphinic)] had
positive associations between BMI and colon cancer, but
non-users did not. Of these, atrazine, cyanazine, trifluralin,
and imazethapyr have an aromatic amine chemical struc-
ture [35]. Previous studies in the AHS reported that use of
two aromatic amine pesticides, imazethapyr [43], and
trifluralin [44], was linked to increased colon cancer risk.
Aromatic amine compounds, mostly those formed from
meats cooked at high temperatures, have been linked to
colon cancer [45, 46]. It is important to note that we also
observed that non-users of six pesticides [insecticide:
terbufos and chlorpyrifos (organophosphate); herbicides:
metribuzin (triazinone), pendimethalin (dinitroaniline),
chlorimuron-ethyl (urea); fumigant: methyl bromide] had
significant associations between BMI and colon cancer, but
users did not (interaction tests were not statistically sig-
nificant). Of these, pendimethalin and chlorimuron-ethyl
are aromatic amine compounds [35]. The occurrence of
significant associations among users and non-users of
pesticides in the same chemical group may indicate that
these are chance findings. In addition, our finding of
positive associations between BMI and colon cancer
among men who used any organophosphate (non-lipophilic
class), and the null association among men who did not use
these pesticides (interaction tests were not statistically
significant), further supports our earlier statement that the
associations between BMI and colon cancer were not
modified by the lipophilic status of pesticides.

<!-- PageFooter="42 Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1773" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->

Our finding of an inverse association between BMI and
lung cancer in men, particularly in ever smokers, is con-
sistent with previous studies [47]. For example, a meta-
analysis of five prospective studies of BMI and lung cancer
reported a statistically significant summary risk ratio of
0.76 (95% CI 0.67-0.85) among smokers, but not among
non-smokers (RR = 0.91, 95% CI 0.76-1.10) [47]. This
could be due to uncontrolled confounding from smoking
because smokers have lower BMIs and a higher risk for
lung cancer [48]. In the AHS, underweight subjects were
more likely to be current smokers, while overweight/obese
subjects were more likely to be former smokers compared
to normal weight subjects. Current smoking was associated
with a significant four-fold risk of lung cancer among men
in our study population. Leanness due to preclinical disease
did not appear to be a confounding factor in our study or
other previous studies [49-51]. Biological mechanisms
explaining the relationship between leanness and lung
cancer risk among smokers are not well understood, but it
has been suggested that leanness may serve as a marker of
vulnerability to the effects of smoking either through
acquired or inherited factors [52, 53].

Among male ever smokers, there was a statistically
significant inverse association between BMI and lung
cancer in non-users of carbofuran, but a null association in
those that used carbofuran. A previous study in the AHS
found elevated risks of lung cancer with reported use of
carbofuran [54, 55]. This finding together with our obser-
vation suggests the possibility that carbofuran use may
interact with obesity to increase the risk of lung cancer.

The positive association between BMI and breast cancer
among postmenopausal women is in agreement with pre-
vious studies [56, 57]. The main source of estrogen in
postmenopausal women is from androstenedione in adi-
pocytes; therefore, heavier postmenopausal women tend to
produce more estrogen, which is linked to higher cell
proliferation and DNA damage [58]. In premenopausal
women, regular anovulatory cycle reduces exposure to
estrogen and decreases their breast cancer risk [56, 58]. It is
unclear why the positive association between BMI and
breast cancer was apparent in those who did not drink,
since alcohol consumption is considered a risk factor for
postmenopausal breast cancer due to the decrease in the
clearance of estradiol [59, 60]. In our population, ever
alcohol drinking was associated with an excess risk of
postmenopausal breast cancer in women with a BMI <
25 kg/m2 (HR = 1.25, 95% CI = 0.85-1.86), but not in
women with a BMI > 25 kg/m2 (HR = 0.87, 95%
CI = 0.63-1.19). The interaction between BMI and alco-
hol consumption was found in a case-control study that
reported that one drink per day was associated with
estrogen receptor positive tumors in women with a BMI <
25 kg/m2, but not in women with a BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2 [61].

A few other studies have suggested that alcohol intake and
BMI may only be risk factors for certain histologic types of
breast cancer [62, 63], which we were not able to evaluate
in our study.

The positive associations between BMI and postmeno-
pausal breast cancer were present among women who did
not use malathion, diazinon, or any organophosphate or
organochlorine insecticide, but not in women who used
these pesticides. Since this modifying effect was not spe-
cific to a particular pesticide, this finding appears to sug-
gest some uncontrolled difference between women who
applied and did not apply pesticides. Consistent with our
results, a previous study of breast cancer in the AHS found
that women who never applied pesticides, including orga-
nophosphates or organochlorines, had higher risks of breast
cancer than women who applied pesticides [64]. Reasons
for this finding are unclear but may suggest a possible
protective effect of working on the farm (i.e., physical
activity, vitamin D exposure), although further study is
needed.

This study has several important strengths. Due to the
prospective study design, pesticide use and other self-
reported data recorded at enrollment was obtained prior to
cancer diagnosis, thus any recall bias should be non-dif-
ferential and unlikely to create false-positive associations.
Self-reported pesticide use among farmers in the AHS has
been shown to be reasonably reliable [65, 66]. Detailed
demographic, lifestyle, and medical history data allowed us
to adjust for several important risk factors. Misclassifi-
cation of cancer diagnoses is unlikely given the linkage to
population-based state cancer registries.

There are limitations to this study. Although BMI is a
well-defined indicator of obesity, it has been shown to
overestimate obesity in athletes [67]. This potentially could
have occurred in our population given the physical activity
of farmers, and the higher prevalence of overweight in our
study population and other farming populations compared
to the general US population. Some participants did not
provide height and weight at enrollment. Two data sources
were used to estimate missing height and weight at
enrollment, i.e., 5-year follow-up phone interview and
driver's license data. To evaluate the possible impact of
pre-existing cancer, we excluded lung cancer cases diag-
nosed within the first 5 years after enrollment and found
the associations were not altered. Because we examined the
interactions of several pesticides, it is possible that some of
our results could have occurred by chance alone. It is not
clear if pesticide use resulted in obesity since we could not
evaluate change in weight over time. Furthermore, since
the mechanisms by which pesticides may interact with
BMI on cancer risk in humans are unclear, our findings
should be considered hypothesis generating for future
studies.

<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1774" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->

In conclusion, in this US population of farmers, pesti-
cide applicators and their spouses, we found that BMI is
positively associated with colon cancer in men and with
breast cancer in postmenopausal women, as well as
inversely associated with lung cancer among men who ever
smoked. This is the first large prospective cohort study with
the capacity to examine possible modifying effects of
several pesticides on the association between BMI and
several cancer sites. The positive association between BMI
and colon cancer in men who ever used carbofuran or
metolachlor raised the possibility that certain pesticides
may modify the effects of BMI on the risks of some can-
cers. The potential for this interaction should be evaluated
in other populations.

Acknowledgments This paper has been supported by the Intramural
Research Program of the NIH, National Cancer Institute (Z01
CP010119), and National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
(Z01-ES049030-11). We thank the Agricultural Health Study partic-
ipants for their participation, and the field station and coordinating
center staff for their efforts.


## References

1\. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, McDowell MA, Flegal KM (2007)
Obesity among adults in the United States-no change since
2003-2004. NCHS data brief no 1. National Center for Health
Statistics, Hyattsville

2\. Calle EE, Kaaks R (2004) Overweight, obesity and cancer: epi-
demiological evidence and proposed mechanisms. Nat Rev
Cancer 4:579-591

3\. Samanic C, Gridley G, Chow WH, Lubin J, Hoover RN, Frau-
meni JF Jr (2004) Obesity and cancer risk among white and black
United States veterans. Cancer Causes Control 15(1):35-43

4\. Hjartåker A, Langseth H, Weiderpass E (2008) Obesity and
diabetes epidemics: cancer repercussions. Adv Exp Med Biol
630:72-93

5\. Bianchini F, Kaaks R, Vainio H (2002) Overweight, obesity, and
cancer risk. Lancet Oncol 3:565-574

6\. Blair A, Zahm SH, Pearce NE, Heineman EF, Fraumeni JF Jr
(1992) Clues to cancer etiology from studies of farmers. Scand J
Work Environ Health 18:209-215

7\. Keller-Byrne JE, Khuder SA, Schaub EA (1997) Meta-analyses
of prostate cancer and farming. Am J Ind Med 31:580-586

8\. Khuder SA, Mutgi AB (1997) Meta-analyses of multiple mye-
loma and farming. Am J Ind Med 32:510-516

9\. Khuder SA, Mutgi AB, Schaub EA, Tano BD (1999) Meta-
analysis of Hodgkin's disease among farmers. Scand J Work
Environ Health 25:436-441

10\. Alavanja MC, Ward MH, Reynolds P (2007) Carcinogenicity of
agricultural pesticides in adults and children. J Agromedicine
12:39-56

11\. Alavanja MC, Hoppin JA, Kamel F (2004) Health effects of
chronic pesticide exposure: cancer and neurotoxicity. Annu Rev
Public Health 25:155-197

12\. Alavanja MC, Bonner MR (2005) Pesticides and human cancers.
Cancer Invest 23:700-711

13\. International Agency for Research on Cancer. Occupational
exposures in insecticide application, and some pesticides. Lyon:

IARC, 1991. IARC Monographs on the evaluation of carcino-
genic risk to humans, vol. 53

14\. Kelce WR, Stone CR, Laws SC, Gray LE, Kemppainen JA,
Wilson EM (1995) Persistent DDT metabolite p, p'-DDE is a
potent androgen receptor antagonist. Nature 375:581-585

15\. Soto AM, Sonnenschein C, Chung KL, Fernandez MF, Olea N,
Serrano FO (1995) The E-SCREEN assay as a tool to identify
estrogens: an update on estrogenic environmental pollutants.
Environ Health Perspect 103:113-122

16\. Schildkraut JM, Demark-Wahnefried W, DeVoto E, Hughes C,
Laseter JL, Newman B (1999) Environmental contaminants and
body fat distribution. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 8:179-
183

17\. Pelletier C, Després JP, Tremblay A (2002) Plasma organochlo-
rine concentrations in endurance athletes and obese individuals.
Med Sci Sports Exerc 34:1971-1975

18\. Diamanti-Kandarakis E, Bourguignon JP, Giudice LC, Hauser R,
Prins GS, Soto AM, Zoeller RT, Gore AC (2009) Endocrine-
disrupting chemicals: an endocrine society scientific statement.
Endocr Rev 30:293-342

19\. Slotkin TA, Seidler FJ (2009) Oxidative and excitatory mecha-
nisms of developmental neurotoxicity: transcriptional profiles for
chlorpyrifos, diazinon, dieldrin, and divalent nickel in PC12 cells.
Environ Health Perspect 117:587-596

20\. Baillie-Hamilton PF (2002) Chemical toxins: a hypothesis to
explain the global obesity epidemic. J Altern Complement Med
8:185-192

21\. Heindel JJ (2003) Endocrine disruptors and the obesity epidemic.
Toxicol Sci 76:247-249

22\. Irigaray P, Ogier V, Jacquenet S, Notet V, Sibille P, Méjean L,
Bihain BE, Yen FT (2006) Benzo[a]pyrene impairs beta-adren-
ergic stimulation of adipose tissue lipolysis and causes weight
gain in mice. A novel molecular mechanism of toxicity for a
common food pollutant. FEBS J 273:1362-1372

23\. Alavanja MC, Sandler DP, McMaster SB, Zahm SH, McDonnell
CJ, Lynch CF, Pennybacker M, Rothman N, Dosemeci M, Bond
AE, Blair A (1996) The Agricultural Health Study. Environ
Health Perspect 104:362-369

24\. Tarone RE, Alavanja MC, Zahm SH, Lubin JH, Sandler DP,
McMaster SB, Rothman N, Blair A (1997) The Agricultural
Health Study: factors affecting completion and return of self-
administered questionnaires in a large prospective cohort study of
pesticide applicators. Am J Ind Med 31:233-242

25\. World Health Organization (1998) Obesity. Preventing and
managing the global epidemic. Report of a WHO consultation
on obesity, Geneva, 3-5 June. World Health Organization,
Geneva

26\. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, McDowell MA, Tabak CJ,
Flegal KM (2006) Prevalence of overweight and obesity in the
United States, 1999-2004. JAMA 295:1549-1555

27\. Dorner T, Leitner B, Stadlmann H, Fischer W, Neidhart B,
Lawrence K, Kiefer I, Rathmanner T, Kunze M, Rieder A (2004)
Prevalence of overweight and obesity in Austrian male and
female farmers. Soz Praventivmed 49:243-246

28\. Jenkins PL, Earle-Richardson G, Bell EM, May JJ, Green A
(2005) Chronic disease risk in central New York dairy farmers:
results from a large health survey 1989-1999. Am J Ind Med
47:20-26

29\. Moore LL, Bradlee ML, Singer MR, Splansky GL, Proctor MH,
Ellison RC, Kreger BE (2004) BMI and waist circumference as
predictors of lifetime colon cancer risk in Framingham Study
adults. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 28:559-567

30\. Rapp K, Schroeder J, Klenk J, Stoehr S, Ulmer H, Concin H,
Diem G, Oberaigner W, Weiland SK (2005) Obesity and inci-
dence of cancer: a large cohort study of over 145, 000 adults in
Austria. Br J Cancer 93:1062-1067

<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="1775" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Cancer Causes Control (2010) 21:1759-1775" -->

31\. Samanic C, Chow WH, Gridley G, Jarvholm B, Fraumeni JF Jr
(2006) Relation of body mass index to cancer risk in 362, 552
Swedish men. Cancer Causes Control 17:901-909

32\. Giovannucci E, Ascherio A, Rimm EB, Colditz GA, Stampfer
MJ, Willett WC (1995) Physical activity, obesity, and risk for
colon cancer and adenoma in men. Ann Intern Med 122:327-334

33\. Hardwick JC, Van Den Brink GR, Offerhaus GJ, Van Deventer
SJ, Peppelenbosch MP (2001) Leptin is a growth factor for
colonic epithelial cells. Gastroenterology 121:79-90

34\. Calle EE, Thun MJ (2004) Obesity and cancer. Oncogene
23:365-378

35\. Kamboj A, Kiran R, Sandhir R (2006) N-acetylcysteine amelio-
rates carbofuran-induced alterations in lipid composition and
activity of membrane bound enzymes. Mol Cell Biochem
286:107-114

36\. Kid H, James DR (eds) (1991) The agrochemicals handbook.
Unwin Brothers Limited, United Kingdom

37\. http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/reregistration/REDs/factsheets/car
bofuran_ired_fs.htm

38\. http://www.epa.gov/oppsrrd1/REDs/factsheets/0063fact.pdf

39\. http://www.epa.gov/oppsrrd1/reregistration/REDs/factsheets/000
1fact.pdf

40\. Lee WJ, Sandler DP, Blair A, Samanic C, Cross AJ, Alavanja
MC (2007) Pesticide use and colorectal cancer risk in the Agri-
cultural Health Study. Int J Cancer 121:339-346

41\. Bonner MR, Lee WJ, Sandler DP, Hoppin JA, Dosemeci M,
Alavanja MC (2005) Occupational exposure to carbofuran and
the incidence of cancer in the Agricultural Health Study. Environ
Health Perspect 113:285-289

42\. Rusiecki JA, Hou L, Lee WJ, Blair A, Dosemeci M, Lubin JH,
Bonner M, Samanic C, Hoppin JA, Sandler DP, Alavanja MC
(2006) Cancer incidence among pesticide applicators exposed to
metolachlor in the Agricultural Health Study. Int J Cancer
118:3118-3123

43\. Koutros S, Lynch CF, Ma X, Lee WJ, Hoppin JA, Christensen
CH, Andreotti G, Freeman LB, Rusiecki JA, Hou L, Sandler DP,
Alavanja MC (2009) Heterocyclic aromatic amine pesticide use
and human cancer risk: results from the US Agricultural Health
Study. Int J Cancer 124:1206-1212

44\. Kang D, Park SK, Beane-Freeman L, Lynch CF, Knott CE,
Sandler DP, Hoppin JA, Dosemeci M, Coble J, Lubin J, Blair A,
Alavanja M (2008) Cancer incidence among pesticide applicators
exposed to trifluralin in the Agricultural Health Study. Environ
Res 107:271-276

45\. Nowell S, Coles B, Sinha R, Macleod S, Luke Ratnasinghe D,
Stotts C, Kadlubar FF, Ambrosone CB, Lang NP (2002) Analysis
of total meat intake and exposure to individual heterocyclic
amines in a case-control study of colorectal cancer: contribution
of metabolic variation to risk. Mutat Res 506-507:175-185

46\. Butler LM, Sinha R, Millikan RC, Martin CF, Newman B,
Gammon MD, Ammerman AS, Sandler RS (2003) Heterocyclic
amines, meat intake, and association with colon cancer in a
population-based study. Am J Epidemiol 157:434-445

47\. Renehan AG, Tyson M, Egger M, Heller RF, Zwahlen M (2008)
Body-mass index and incidence of cancer: a systematic review
and meta-analysis of prospective observational studies. Lancet
371:569-578

48\. Canoy D, Wareham N, Luben R, Welch A, Bingham S, Day N,
Khaw KT (2005) Cigarette smoking and fat distribution in 21,
828 British men and women: a population-based study. Obes Res
13:1466-1475

49\. Kark JD, Yaari S, Rasooly I, Goldbourt U (1995) Are lean
smokers at increased risk of lung cancer? The Israel Civil Servant
Cancer Study. Arch Intern Med 155:2409-2416

50\. Olson JE, Yang P, Schmitz K, Vierkant RA, Cerhan JR, Sellers
TA (2002) Differential association of body mass index and fat

distribution with three major histologic types of lung cancer:
evidence from a cohort of older women. Am J Epidemiol
156:606-615

51\. Kanashiki M, Sairenchi T, Saito Y, Ishikawa H, Satoh H, Se-
kizawa K (2005) Body mass index and lung cancer: a case-con-
trol study of subjects participating in a mass-screening program.
Chest 128:1490-1496

52\. Sidney S, Friedman GD, Siegelaub AB (1987) Thinness and
mortality. Am J Public Health 77:317-322

53\. Shields PG, Harris CC (1991) Molecular epidemiology and the
genetics of environmental cancer. JAMA 266:681-687

54\. Alavanja MC, Dosemeci M, Samanic C, Lubin J, Lynch CF,
Knott C, Barker J, Hoppin JA, Sandler DP, Coble J, Thomas K,
Blair A (2004) Pesticides and lung cancer risk in the agricultural
health study cohort. Am J Epidemiol 160:876-885

55\. Bonner MR, Lee WJ, Sandler DP, Hoppin JA, Dosemeci M,
Alavanja MC (2005) Occupational exposure to carbofuran and
the incidence of cancer in the Agricultural Health Study. Environ
Health Perspect 113:285-289

56\. Carmichael AR, Bates T (2004) Obesity and breast cancer: a
review of the literature. Breast 13:85-92

57\. Kuriyama S, Tsubono Y, Hozawa A, Shimazu T, Suzuki Y,
Koizumi Y, Suzuki Y, Ohmori K, Nishino Y, Tsuji I (2005)
Obesity and risk of cancer in Japan. Int J Cancer 113:148-157

58\. Potischman N, Swanson CA, Siiteri P, Hoover RN (1996) Reversal
of relation between body mass and endogenous estrogen concen-
trations with menopausal status. J Natl Cancer Inst 88:756-758

59\. Duffy CM, Assaf A, Cyr M, Burkholder G, Coccio E, Rohan T,
McTiernan A, Paskett E, Lane D, Chetty VK (2008) Alcohol and
folate intake and breast cancer risk in the WHI observational
study. Breast Cancer Res Treat

60\. Wayne S, Neuhouser ML, Ulrich CM, Koprowski C, Wiggins C,
Baumgartner KB, Bernstein L, Baumgartner RN, Gilliland F,
McTiernan A, Ballard-Barbash R (2008) Association between
alcohol intake and serum sex hormones and peptides differs by
tamoxifen use in breast cancer survivors. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 17:3224-3232

61\. Terry MB, Zhang FF, Kabat G, Britton JA, Teitelbaum SL,
Neugut AI, Gammon MD (2006) Lifetime alcohol intake and
breast cancer risk. Ann Epidemiol 16:230-240

62\. Li CI, Daling JR, Malone KE, Bernstein L, Marchbanks PA, Liff
JM, Strom BL, Simon MS, Press MF, McDonald JA, Ursin G,
Burkman RT, Deapen D, Spirtas R (2006) Relationship between
established breast cancer risk factors and risk of seven different
histologic types of invasive breast cancer. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 15:946-954

63\. Suzuki R, Orsini N, Mignone L, Saji S, Wolk A (2008) Alcohol
intake and risk of breast cancer defined by estrogen and proges-
terone receptor status-a meta-analysis of epidemiological stud-
ies. Int J Cancer 122:1832-1841

64\. Engel LS, Hill DA, Hoppin JA, Lubin JH, Lynch CF, Pierce J,
Samanic C, Sandler DP, Blair A, Alavanja MC (2005) Pesticide
use and breast cancer risk among farmers' wives in the agricul-
tural health study. Am J Epidemiol 161:121-123

65\. Blair A, Tarone R, Sandler D, Lynch CF, Rowland A, Winters-
teen W, Steen WC, Samanic C, Dosemeci M, Alavanja MC
(2002) Reliability of reporting on life-style and agricultural fac-
tors by a sample of participants in the Agricultural Health Study
from Iowa. Epidemiology 13:94-99

66\. Hoppin JA, Yucel F, Dosemeci M, Sandler DP (2002) Accuracy
of self-reported pesticide use duration information from licensed
pesticide applicators in the Agricultural Health Study. J Expo
Anal Environ Epidemiol 12:313-318

67\. Ode JJ, Pivarnik JM, Reeves MJ, Knous JL (2007) Body mass
index as a predictor of percent fat in college athletes and non-
athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc 39:403-409

<!-- PageFooter="Springer" -->
