<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Author Manuscript" -->


<figure>

\\\MENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN

SERVICES . USA

</figure>


<!-- PageHeader="HHS Public Access Author manuscript Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01." -->

Published in final edited form as:
Int J Cancer. 2015 December 1; 137(11): 2630-2643. doi:10.1002/ijc.29621.


# Cancer incidence and metolachlor use in the Agricultural Health Study: An update

Sharon R. Silver1, Steven J. Bertke1, Cynthia J. Hines1, Michael C.R. Alavanja2, Jane A.
Hoppin3, Jay H. Lubin2, Jennifer A. Rusiecki4, Dale P. Sandler5, and Laura E. Beane
Freeman2

1Division of Surveillance, Hazard Evaluations and Field Studies, National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health, Cincinnati, OH

2Occupational and Environmental Epidemiology Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD

3Department of Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC

4Department of Preventive Medicine and Biostatistics, Uniformed Services University of the
Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD

5Epidemiology Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle
Park, NC


## Abstract

Metolachlor, a widely used herbicide, is classified as a Group C carcinogen by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency based on increased liver neoplasms in female rats.
Epidemiologic studies of the health effects of metolachlor have been limited. The Agricultural
Health Study (AHS) is a prospective cohort study including licensed private and commercial
pesticide applicators in Iowa and North Carolina enrolled 1993-1997. We evaluated cancer
incidence through 2010/2011 (NC/IA) for 49,616 applicators, 53% of whom reported ever using
metolachlor. We used Poisson regression to evaluate relations between two metrics of metolachlor
use (lifetime days, intensity-weighted lifetime days) and cancer incidence. We saw no association
between metolachlor use and incidence of all cancers combined (n = 5,701 with a 5-year lag) or
most site-specific cancers. For liver cancer, in analyses restricted to exposed workers, elevations
observed at higher categories of use were not statistically significant. However, trends for both
lifetime and intensity-weighted lifetime days of metolachor use were positive and statistically
significant with an unexposed reference group. A similar pattern was observed for follicular cell
lymphoma, but no other lymphoma subtypes. An earlier suggestion of increased lung cancer risk
at high levels of metolachlor use in this cohort was not confirmed in this update. This suggestion
of an association between metolachlor and liver cancer among pesticide applicators is a novel
finding and echoes observation of increased liver neoplasms in some animal studies. However, our

<!-- PageFooter="Correspondence to: Sharon Silver, Division of Surveillance, Hazard Evaluations and Field Studies, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Cincinnati, OH, USA, ssilver@cdc.gov." -->
<!-- PageFooter="The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. The findings and conclusions expressed in this scientific article are those of the authors and do not reflect the official policy or positions of the Uniformed Services University or the Department of Defense" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 2" -->

findings for both liver cancer and follicular cell lymphoma warrant follow-up to better
differentiate effects of metolachlor use from other factors.


## Keywords

cancer; epidemiology; pesticide; occupation

Metolachlor is a chloroacetanilide herbicide that was first registered in 1976 and is used
primarily on corn, soybeans and sorghum. The US Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA) has classified metolachlor as a "possible human carcinogen" based on mixed
results in rodent studies, with a statistically significant increase in liver neoplasms seen in
female rats at high dose levels.1

Epidemiologic studies of the health effects of metolachlor are quite limited. An ecologic
study in Maryland found a nonsignificantly increased risk of childhood bone cancer in areas
with detectable levels of metolachlor in groundwater supplies2; interpretation of these results
is limited by the presence of multiple contaminants in the groundwater.

To date, the health effects of occupational exposure to metolachlor have been studied only in
the Agricultural Health Study (AHS), a prospective study that includes commercial and
private pesticide applicators in Iowa and private pesticide applicators in North Carolina.
Methodological details of this cohort study have been described elsewhere.3,4 Both a nested
case-control study of lung cancer5 and a prospective follow-up through 2002 of applicators
who used metolachlor6 observed increased risks for lung cancer with high lifetime days of
use. These analyses saw weaker associations with intensity-weighted lifetime days, a metric
that accounts for exposure-modifying factors.7 Associations between metolachlor use and
incidence of a number of other cancers were also examined in the prospective study.6 The
study found a decreasing risk of prostate cancer with increasing lifetime days of reported
use. Rectal cancer was significantly elevated in the highest lifetime-days category and
nonsignificantly elevated using intensity-weighted lifetime days. However, cases were
sparse, and the elevations were attenuated when nonexposed applicators were used for
comparison.º No statistically significant associations with ever use of metolachlor were seen
in AHS studies of multiple risk factors for specific cancers in applicators: melanoma,8
pancreatic cancer9 and colon or rectal cancer.10

The current evaluation extended follow-up of the cohort (through 2010 in North Carolina
and 2011 in Iowa) to further evaluate the associations between occupational use of
metolachlor and cancer incidence. This update also incorporated new exposure information
from a follow-up interview. While exposure-response relations for all cancers with at least
20 cases in metolachlor users were examined, results for lung, prostate and rectal cancer
were of particular interest in light of previous analyses, and liver cancer was of interest
because of the animal data.

<!-- PageFooter="Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 3" -->


## Methods


### Population

Pesticide applicators were enrolled at pesticide licensing sessions conducted between 1993
and 1997 in Iowa (private and commercial applicators) and North Carolina (private
applicators only). Of the 57,310 licensed restricted-use applicators in this cohort, we
excluded 6,259 because they did not provide sufficient information to quantify days of
metolachlor use; 1,094 because of a cancer diagnosis other than nonmelanoma skin cancer
before enrollment in the AHS; and 341 who had no person-time at risk. Of the 49,616
eligible applicators, 36 were included in the lifetime-days usage analyses but excluded from
analyses of intensity-weighted lifetime days because they lacked data for the latter metric.

We ascertained cancer incidence by linking cohort records to cancer registry files through
2010 for North Carolina and 2011 for Iowa. In addition, to determine vital status, we linked
cohort members to the death registries of these two states and to the National Death Index.

Exposure assessment for the AHS has been described in depth elsewhere.7,11-13 At
enrollment, self-administered questionnaires were used to collect data on lifetime pesticide
use and application practices, demographic and lifestyle data and personal and family
history of cancer. Approximately 5 years later (1999-2005), applicators completed a
telephone questionnaire about pesticide use during the most recent year of application as an
indicator of pesticide use over the interval since enrollment.14,15 Overall, 36,342 applicators
(63% of the full cohort) responded to this second questionnaire. We evaluated two metrics:
lifetime days and intensity-weighted lifetime days of metolachlor use. The lifetime days
metric was the summation of self-reported use from the enrollment and follow-up
questionnaires.11 The weighting factors for the intensity-weighted lifetime days metric were
designed to account for use of personal protective equipment, methods of pesticide
application, whether the applicator repaired pesticide application equipment and whether the
applicator mixed pesticides. These factors were modified since the previous analyses of
metolachlor to incorporate refinements based on field measurement data for subgroups of
the AHS population, resulting in minor changes to the intensity-weighted lifetime days.7 In
addition, analyses included a data-driven multiple imputation for days of use for applicators
who did not complete the 1999-2005 questionnaire.15


### Statistical analysis

With the availability of 5-year follow-up (AHS phase 2) information, we computed
metolachlor use as a time-dependent quantity. We categorized lifetime days and intensity-
weighted lifetime days of use with quartiles based on the distribution among exposed cancer
cases (excluding nonmelanoma skin cancers). As in the original analysis,6 we observed that
demographic characteristics for groups with higher metolachlor use were more similar to
those using less metolachlor than to unexposed applicators, and therefore again produced
two sets of analyses: one restricted to person-time after first metolachlor use and a second
without this restriction.

We used Poisson regression to generate rate ratios (RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
for the relations among metolachlor use and all cancers combined, as well as specific cancer

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 4" -->

sites, and the MIANALYZE procedure to determine variances for 95% CI calculation when
using phase 2 imputed data. We used SAS (version 9.3; SAS Institute, Cary, NC) for all
analyses. We accumulated person-time-at-risk for each 2-year calendar increment from the
date of enrollment (1993-1997) through the earliest of the study end date (December 31,
2010 in North Carolina and December 31, 2011 in Iowa), date of first cancer diagnosis
(other than non-melanoma skin cancer), date of death or the date first moved out of state.
We used the midpoint value of each exposure category treated as a continuous variable to
test for linear trend. All tests were two-sided and conducted at a = 0.05. To account for
disease latency, we selected a 5-year lag for the primary analyses, discounting the five most
recent years of exposure, but also conducted unlagged analyses for comparison with earlier
AHS analyses.

We adjusted all models for attained age (using restricted cubic splines), cigarette smoking
(never/low/high, with the median value of pack-years among smokers used to demarcate low
and high categories), alcohol use reported in the year before enrollment (never, and tertiles
of number of drinks per month among applicators reporting drinking), family history of
cancer at any site in first-degree relatives (yes/no), applicator type (private, commercial) and
state of residence (Iowa/North Carolina). For oral cavity cancers, we also assessed the
effects of adjusting for ever use of oral tobacco (snuff or chewing tobacco). We adjusted for
sex and race (white, nonwhite) for all cancers combined and for race for cancers of the
prostate and lung. For the other outcomes of interest, all or almost all cases occurred in
white males, so all applicators were retained in the analyses with no adjustment for sex or
race (with the exception of exclusions for sex-specific cancers). We identified the five most
highly correlated pesticides by categorizing unlagged intensity-weighted lifetime days for
each pesticide and calculating the correlation with quartiles of intensity-weighted lifetime
days for metolachlor. To adjust for these pesticides in the analyses, we categorized exposure
to each as never, low and high, with the median of intensity-weighted lifetime days used to
differentiate low from high exposure. A separate category was used to indicate missing data
for each correlated pesticide.


## Results

Among the 49,616 applicators meeting inclusion criteria, 26,505 (53%) reported any
metolachlor use (Table 1). Follow-up for all applicators averaged 14.9 years, double the
average follow-up available for the first analysis of cancer incidence and metolachlor use.
The applicators were almost all white (97%) and male (97%). For most demographic and
exposure characteristics, differences between applicators who did not use metolachlor and
those with any use were larger than differences among the groups with different levels of
use. Applicators reporting metolachlor usage were more likely to have consumed alcohol in
the past year and to have at least a high school education. The largest difference was state of
residence, with >70% of applicators in each usage category residing in Iowa, compared to
57% of those who did not use metolachlor. Alcohol consumption and smoking differed by
state, with the former higher in Iowa and the latter higher in North Carolina.

Applicators in the highest metolachlor usage quartile differed in some respects from the
applicators who did not use metolachlor and those who used less metolachor; in particular,

<!-- PageFooter="Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 5" -->

many more in the highest quartile were commercial applicators (20.6% of applicators in
quartile 4 vs. < 8% of applicators in each of the other usage groups and in nonusers of
metolachlor). Applicators in the highest usage group were also most likely to have used one
or more of the highly correlated pesticides: imazethapyr, alachlor, atrazine, dicamba and/or
trifluralin.

Among applicators who ever used metolachlor, with low-exposed applicators as the referent,
results for all cancers combined and for most specific cancer sites exhibited few trends or
significant elevations in the top quartiles for lifetime days or intensity-weighted lifetime
days of use with a 5-year lag (Table 2). However, several cancers did show increased (oral
cavity, rectal and testicular cancer) or decreased (leukemia and prostate and stomach cancer)
risk with higher levels of metolachlor use. Neither point estimates nor trends were
statistically significant. For oral cavity malignancies, adjusting for oral tobacco (snuff or
dip) use had little effect on the results.

Although NHL as a grouped outcome showed no evidence of a trend, RRs for the follicular
cell lymphoma subtype16 were elevated in all categories for lifetime days and, in the third
and fourth quartiles, for intensity-weighted lifetime days, though trends were not statistically
significant. Liver cancer showed nonstatistically significant increased risks in the third and
fourth quartiles for both exposure metrics; the tests for trend were not significant (p = 0.10).
Because liver cancer was the only outcome with fewer than five cases in the lowest
metolachlor use category with cutpoints based on all cancers combined, we also performed
alternate analyses using categories based on the equal distribution of exposed liver cancer
cases. The results were similar (data not shown) to those presented above, although risk
estimates increased and the trend approached statistical significance (p = 0.07) for intensity-
weighted lifetime days.

Analyses with the unexposed as the referent did not change the conclusions for most
outcomes (Table 3). Point estimates for lung and pancreatic cancers were lower, with all
exposed categories in deficit in these analyses, but neither the category estimates nor trends
attained statistical significance. For leukemia, the small suggestion of a negative trend
disappeared, and for rectal cancer, point estimates in the top three quartiles decreased. For
all outcomes, findings were similar when unlagged data were used (results not shown).
Results were also similar for sensitivity analyses excluding applicators who did not respond
to the second questionnaire and analyses removing applicator type from the models.

The most notable results of the analyses with the unexposed referent were for follicular cell
lymphoma and liver cancer, both of which had statistically significant positive trends.
Follicular cell lymphoma showed elevations in all but the first quartile, with the highest
lifetime-days quartile attaining statistical significance; trends for both metolachlor use
metrics were statistically significant. A test for homogeneity did not show statistically
significant differences between NHL subtypes, but cases were sparse for some subtypes,
including follicular cell. For liver cancer, we observed statistically significant increases in
the third and fourth quartiles and statistically significant trends for both lifetime days and
intensity-weighted lifetime days.

<!-- PageFooter="Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 6" -->


## Discussion

This updated examination of metolachlor use and cancer in the AHS cohort found
suggestions of positive associations between metolachlor use and incidence of both liver
cancer and follicular cell lymphoma, though there were few exposed cases for either
outcome (n = 25 and 32, respectively). To our knowledge, this is the first occupational
epidemiology study to report positive associations between metolachlor exposure and these
two outcomes. The findings for liver cancer are of particular interest, given observations of
increased liver neoplasms in some animals exposed to metolachlor.

Studies underlying the USEPA classification of metolachor as a "possible human
carcinogen" found mixed results in rodents, with female rats showing the most strongly
positive results for hepatic neoplasms.17 No increased tumor incidence was observed in
Charles River DC-1 mice.18 Other hepatic effects in rats included induction of liver
enzymes,19,20 a dose-related increase in hepatocellular hypertrophy (male rats)17 and cystic
cholangioma at high doses (female rats).17 A study comparing the effects on cells of
metolachlor and alachlor, a structural analog, found metolachlor to be less cytotoxic than
alachlor to human hepatoma (HepG2) cells.21 Another study found metolachlor to be less
cytotoxic than alachlor and acetochlor to rat hepatocytes but of equivalent potency in human
hepatocytes. In addition to the hepatic effects,22 increased incidence of nasal cavity tumors
was reported in male rats in a high dose group.23 In our study, there were too few female
applicators to evaluate sex differences for specific cancer sites.

The potential mechanism of metolachlor hepatic carcinogenicity is unknown, and results
appear to differ for rat and human cells and subcellular components. Metolachlor has been
shown to induce hepatic CYP2B1/2 activity in male rats.19 Researchers have suggested an
activation pathway leading to a DNA-reactive dialykylbenzoquinone imine, but a study
found that while rat liver microsomes exposed to metolachlor produced one important
intermediate [2-chloro-N-(2-methyl-6-ethylphenyl)acetamide], human liver microsomes did
not.18 However, other investigators have shown greater potential for cytotoxicity in human
than in rat hepatocytes.22 Clarification of the reasons for these differences would facilitate
evaluation of the potential for carcinogenicity in humans.

We also observed statistically significant positive trends for follicular lymphoma for both
lifetime and intensity-weighted lifetime days. While a previous AHS analysis of metolachlor
did not find associations between metolachlor use and either NHL or lymphohematopoietic
cancers in general,6 an AHS examination of cancer incidence related to alachlor use reported
a positive, statistically significant trend for lymphohematopoietic cancers.24 In human
lymphocytes, metolachlor has not been found to induce sister chromatid exchanges.25
Whether metolachlor produces a clastogenic response in human lymphocytes is unclear,
with both positive20 and negative26 reports.

The findings from this update of the cohort are similar to those in the earlier report on cancer
incidence and metolachlor use6 for rectal cancer, with nonsignificant elevations in all
categories above the referent but no significant trend. Prostate cancer continues to have

<!-- PageFooter="Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 7" -->

decreasing risks with increasing lifetime days of exposure, although the results in the update
are not statistically significant.

The excess lung cancer at higher lifetime days of metolachlor exposure previously seen in
the cohort5,6 is absent in this update, with no observed exposure response and no notable or
statistically significant increase in any exposure quartile. When we replicated the original
analysis using the original exposure information collected at enrollment, but incorporating
the 6 years of additional follow-up, the relations with both lifetime days and intensity-
weighted lifetime days were less strong than in the previous analysis.6 Quite a number of
lung cancer cases have accrued in the interim; while the original analysis had 46
metolachlor-using cases with no lag imposed, the current analysis has almost 200 such cases
with a 5-year lag. When we then added the exposure information from the follow-up
questionnaire, the exposure response was dampened further, although this effect of the
additional exposure data was more modest than the effect of extending follow-up.
Sensitivity analyses, which (i) removed the imputed values and (ii) limited analysis to
participants who completed the follow-up questionnaire, did not produce large changes in
the results. Pesticides most correlated with metolachlor use differed in the two studies, but
an additional sensitivity analysis using the original pesticide confounders also failed to
explain the difference between the two analyses. Collectively, these results suggest that the
addition of person-time and new cases with different metolachlor use patterns account for
the majority of the attenuation of the previously observed relation between metolachlor and
lung cancer. In the update, only 15% of applicators reported using metolachlor in the most
recent farming year, in contrast with 48% reporting ever-use of metolachlor on the
enrollment questionnaire; 20% of the cohort were no longer farming as of phase 2 follow-
up. In addition, the volume of metolachlor used in the United States has declined since the
mid-1990s,27,28 and increased use of personal protective equipment, other changes in
application methods and changes in metolachlor formulation during the follow-up period
may have decreased exposures. The apparent attenuation of lung cancer risk may indicate
that diminishing use has reduced risk, that the previous results were due to chance or that
latency may be important. In our study, with unexposed applicators in the reference group,
the relation is in fact negative, though not statistically significant.

Study strengths include the size of the cohort, which comprises 26,505 metolachlor users, as
well as 23,111 nonusers of this herbicide. The questionnaires used were quite
comprehensive, including information on use of other pesticides, use of personal protective
equipment and methods of application. The imputation method used was developed based
on applicator characteristics and, for metolachlor, data withheld from development of the
imputation algorithm were quite consistent with results generated by the algorithm.15 Recall
bias was minimized by initial collection of pesticide use and lifestyle information at study
entry, and assessments of the reliability of pesticide use report data in the study have been
positive.12,13

Our inability to distinguish between two metolachlor isomers, S-metolachlor and R-
metolachlor, is a limitation of the study. S-metolachlor is the more herbicidally active
isomer. The original metolachlor marketed was a 50-50 mixture of the R- and S-isomers. In
1997, the manufacturer registered a new product, S-metolachlor, which contained 88% S-

<!-- PageFooter="Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 8" -->

isomer, 12% R-isomer. S-metolachlor can be applied at a lower rate than the old product
because it has more of the active isomer. The old formulation was taken off the market in
September 1999, but was brought back onto the market as a generic in 2003.29 Chronic
toxicity testing on Daphnia magna found R-metolachlor to be significantly more toxic with
respect to longevity and reproductive outcomes than S-metolachlor30; smaller amounts of
product with higher concentrations of S-metolachlor can be applied because of its greater
efficacy, leading to the potential for reduced applicator exposures.

Additional follow-up time would allow for sensitivity analyses using a multiplier assuming
reduced intensity calculation for days accrued from 1999 forward. However, one study
reported that while S-metolachlor did not increase the frequency of micronuclei, a
commercial formulation of S-metolachlor did; the authors suggest that additional
xenobiotics in the commercial formulation may be responsible for this effect.31 If "other or
inert" ingredients (which may vary over time and by commercial formulation and are often
not identified in commercial products), rather than metolachlor itself, are responsible for
apparent associations, then accounting for the change in the relative proportions of the
isomers may do little to improve assessment of the relations between metolachlor and these
malignancies.

The finding of a positive exposure-response relation between liver cancer and metolachlor
use comprises the first report suggesting that the increased liver neoplasms observed in rats
may have a correlate in humans. The trends for liver cancer results, as well as for follicular
cell lymphoma, were positive regardless of the reference group but attained statistical
significance in analyses using unexposed person-time as the referent. Additional follow-up
would facilitate assessment of whether the differences in the results reflect greater statistical
power with a larger reference category or other exposure-related factors that we were unable
to control for in our analyses. Further follow-up would also permit better assessment of the
role of latency in these associations, as well as evaluation of the role of metolachlor
exposure in other health outcomes, particularly those for which cases are sparse or for which
a longer lag period may be more biologically plausible.


## Acknowledgments

Grant sponsor: Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute,
Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics; Grant number: Z01CP010119; Grant sponsor: Intramural
Research Program of the National Institutes of Health; Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of
Health, National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences; Grant number: Z01ES049030

The authors thank the participants of the Agricultural Health Study for their contribution to this research. Data were
obtained from the Agricultural Health Study data release P1REL201209.00 and P2REL201209.00.


## References

1\. EPA Reregistration Eligibility Decision (RED) Metolachlor. US Environmental Protection Agency
Office of Pesticide Programs (OOP), Prevention, Pesticides, and Toxic Substances. Washington,
DC: 1995. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/opp00001/reregistration/REDs/0001.pdf [Accessed
July 14, 2014]

2\. Thorpe N, Shirmohammadi A. Herbicides and nitrates in groundwater of Maryland and childhood
cancers: a geographic information systems approach. J Environ Sci Health C. 2005; 23:261-78.

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 9" -->

3\. Alavanja MC, Sandler DP, Lynch CF, et al. Cancer incidence in the Agricultural Health Study.
Scand J Work Environ Health. 2005; 31 (Suppl 1):39-45. discussion 5-7. [PubMed: 16190148]

4\. Alavanja MC, Sandler DP, McMaster SB, et al. The Agricultural Health Study. Environ Health
Perspect. 1996; 104:362-9. [PubMed: 8732939]

5\. Alavanja MC, Dosemeci M, Samanic C, et al. Pesticides and lung cancer risk in the Agricultural
Health Study cohort. Am J Epidemiol. 2004; 160:876-85. [PubMed: 15496540]

6\. Rusiecki JA, Hou L, Lee WJ, et al. Cancer incidence among pesticide applicators exposed to
metolachlor in the Agricultural Health Study. Int J Cancer. 2006; 118:3118-23. [PubMed:
16425265]

7\. Coble J, Thomas KW, Hines CJ, et al. An updated algorithm for estimation of pesticide exposure
intensity in the Agricultural Health Study. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2011; 8:4608-22.
[PubMed: 22408592]

8\. Dennis LK, Lynch CF, Sandler DP, et al. Pesticide use and cutaneous melanoma in pesticide
applicators in the agricultural heath study. Environ Health Perspect. 2010; 118:812-17. [PubMed:
20164001]

9\. Andreotti G, Hou L, Beane Freeman LE, et al. Body mass index, agricultural pesticide use, and
cancer incidence in the Agricultural Health Study cohort. Cancer Causes Control. 2010; 21:1759-
75\. [PubMed: 20730623]

10\. Lee WJ, Sandler DP, Blair A, et al. Pesticide use and colorectal cancer risk in the Agricultural
Health Study. Int J Cancer. 2007; 121:339-46. [PubMed: 17390374]

11\. Dosemeci M, Alavanja MC, Rowland AS, et al. A quantitative approach for estimating exposure to
pesticides in the Agricultural Health Study. Ann Occup Hyg. 2002; 46:245-60. [PubMed:
12074034]

12\. Hoppin JA, Yucel F, Dosemeci M, et al. Accuracy of self-reported pesticide use duration
information from licensed pesticide applicators in the Agricultural Health Study. J Expo Anal
Environ Epidemiol. 2002; 12:313-18. [PubMed: 12198579]

13\. Blair A, Tarone R, Sandler D, et al. Reliability of reporting on life-style and agricultural factors by
a sample of participants in the Agricultural Health Study from Iowa. Epidemiology. 2002; 13:94-
9\. [PubMed: 11805592]

14\. Hoppin JA, Long S, Umbach DM, et al. Lifetime organophosphorous insecticide use among
private pesticide applicators in the Agricultural Health Study. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol.
2012; 22:584-92. [PubMed: 22854518]

15\. Heltshe SL, Lubin JH, Koutros S, et al. Using multiple imputation to assign pesticide use for non-
responders in the follow-up questionnaire in the Agricultural Health Study. J Expo Sci Environ
Epidemiol. 2012; 22:409-16. [PubMed: 22569205]

16\. Morton LM, Turner JJ, Cerhan JR, et al. Proposed classification of lymphoid neoplasms for
epidemiologic research from the Pathology Working Group of the International Lymphoma
Epidemiology Consortium (InterLymph). Blood. 2007; 110:695-708. [PubMed: 17389762]

17\. US EPA Toxicology Branch Peer Review Committee. [Accessed June 23, 2014] Memorandum on
Metolachlor. May 30. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/chem_search/cleared_reviews/
csr_PC-108801_23-Aug-85_166.pdf

18\. Coleman S, Linderman R, Hodgson E, et al. Comparative metabolism of chloroacetamide
herbicides and selected metabolites in human and rat liver microsomes. Environ Health Perspect.
2000; 108:1151-7. [PubMed: 11133395]

19\. Dalton SR, Miller RT, Meyer SA. The herbicide metolachlor induces liver cytochrome P450s
2B1/2 and 3A1/2, but not thyroxine-uridine dinucleotide phosphate glucuronosyltransferase and
associated thyroid gland activity. Int J Toxicol. 2003; 22:287-95. [PubMed: 12933323]

20\. Dearfield KL, McCarroll NE, Protzel A, et al. A survey of EPA/OPP and open literature on
selected pesticide chemicals. II. Mutagenicity and carcinogenicity of selected chloroacetanilides
and related compounds. Mutat Res. 1999; 443:183-221. [PubMed: 10415440]

21\. Miranda SR, Meyer SA. Cytotoxicity of chloroacetanilide herbicide alachlor in HepG2 cells
independent of CYP3A4 and CYP3A7. Food Chem Toxicol. 2007; 45:871-7. [PubMed:
17207564]

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 10" -->

22\. Kale VM, Miranda SR, Wilbanks MS, et al. Comparative cytotoxicity of alachlor, acetochlor, and
metolachlor herbicides in isolated rat and cryopreserved human hepatocytes. J Biochem Mol
Toxicol. 2008; 22:41-50. [PubMed: 18273908]

23\. US EPA. [Accessed June 23, 2014] Second Peer Review of Metolachlor. 1991. Available at: http://
www.epa.gov/pesticides/chem_search/cleared_reviews/csr_PC-108801_17-Apr-91_189.pdf

24\. Lee WJ, Hoppin JA, Blair A, et al. Cancer incidence among pesticide applicators exposed to
alachlor in the Agricultural Health Study. Am J Epidemiol. 2004; 159:373-80. [PubMed:
14769641]

25\. Hill AB, Jefferies PR, Quistad GB, et al. Dialkylquinoneimine metabolites of chloroacetanilide
herbicides induce sister chromatid exchanges in cultured human lymphocytes. Mutat Res. 1997;
395:159-71. [PubMed: 9465927]

26\. Grisolia CK, Ferrari I. In vitro and in vivo studies demonstrate non-mutagenicity of the herbicide
metolachlor. Braz J Genet. 1997; 20:411-414.

27\. US EPA. [Accessed August 12, 2014] Pesticides Industry Sales and Usage: 2006 and 2007 Market
Estimates. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/opp00001/pestsales/07pestsales/
table_of_contents2007.htm

28\. US EPA; Agency USEP, editor. [Accessed August 12, 2014] Pesticide Industry Sales and Usage:
1994 and 1995 Market Estimates. 1997. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/opp00001/pestsales/
95pestsales/table_of_contents1995.htm

29\. Prostko, E .; Grey, T. Impact of dual magnum on peanut yields in Georgia. Department of Crop and
Soil Sciences, University of Georgia College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences; 2013.
Available at: http://www.gaweed.com/slides/prostko-apres-2013/prostko-apres-2013.pdf
[Accessed June 23, 2014]

30\. Liu H, Ye W, Zhan X, et al. A comparative study of rac- and S-metolachlor toxicity to Daphnia
magna. Ecotoxicol Environ Safe. 2006; 63:451-5.

31\. Nikoloff N, Escobar L, Soloneski S, et al. Comparative study of cytotoxic and genotoxic effects
induced by herbicide S-metolachlor and its commercial formulation Twin Pack Gold(R) in human
hepatoma (HepG2) cells. Food Chem Toxicol. 2013; 62:777-81. [PubMed: 24144947]

<!-- PageFooter="Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 11" -->


## What's new?

Metolachlor, a widely used herbicide, has been classified as a possible human carcinogen
(Group C) by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency based on an increase in liver
neoplasms in female rats. This update of pesticide applicators in the Agricultural Health
Study is the first occupational epidemiology assessment to report positive associations
between metolachlor use and liver cancer in humans. For both liver cancer and follicular
cell lymphoma, lifetime and intensity-weighted lifetime days of metolachor use showed
positive trends that were statistically significant when applicators with no metolachlor
use were used as the referent group

<!-- PageFooter="Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Table 1
Selected demographic and lifestyle characteristics of applicators by cumulative metolachlor use in the Agricultural Health Study, 1993-2011

<!-- PageFooter="Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01." -->


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Characteristic2</th>
<th colspan="5">Lifetime days of metolachlor use", no lag</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>No use (n = 23,111)</th>
<th>Quartile 1 (n = 7,866)</th>
<th>Quartile 2 (n = 5,079)</th>
<th>Quartile 3 (n =</th>
<th>6,757) Quartile 4 (n = 6,803)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Age (years) number (%)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;50</td>
<td>4,070 (17.6)</td>
<td>1,824 (23.2)</td>
<td>968 (19.1)</td>
<td>1,254 (18.6)</td>
<td>1,205 (17.7)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>50 -&lt; 60</td>
<td>6,498 (28.1)</td>
<td>2,448 (31.1)</td>
<td>1,664 (32.8)</td>
<td>2,304 (34.1)</td>
<td>2,708 (39.8)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>60 -&lt; 70</td>
<td>6,095 (26.4)</td>
<td>1,951 (24.8)</td>
<td>1,369 (27.0)</td>
<td>1,738 (25.7)</td>
<td>1,747 (25.7)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥70</td>
<td>6,448 (27.9)</td>
<td>1,643 (20.9)</td>
<td>1,078 (21.2)</td>
<td>1,461 (21.6)</td>
<td>1,143 (16.8)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Sex</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male</td>
<td>22,060 (95.5)</td>
<td>7,777 (98.9)</td>
<td>5,035 (99.1)</td>
<td>6,710 (99.3)</td>
<td>6,753 (99.3)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Female</td>
<td>1,051 (4.5)</td>
<td>89 (1.1)</td>
<td>44 (0.9)</td>
<td>47 (0.7)</td>
<td>50 (0.7)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Race</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>White</td>
<td>22,427 (97.0)</td>
<td>7,683 (97.7)</td>
<td>4,981 (98.1)</td>
<td>6,633 (98.2)</td>
<td>6,687 (98.3)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Non-White</td>
<td>616 (2.7)</td>
<td>167 (2.1)</td>
<td>93 (1.8)</td>
<td>116 (1.7)</td>
<td>98 (1.4)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Missing</td>
<td>68 (0.3)</td>
<td>16 (0.2)</td>
<td>5 (0.1)</td>
<td>8 (0.1)</td>
<td>18 (0.3)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Family history of cancer</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>13,249 (57.3)</td>
<td>4,608 (58.6)</td>
<td>2,851 (56.1)</td>
<td>3,860 (57.1)</td>
<td>3,958 (58.2)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td>9,080 (39.3)</td>
<td>3,038 (38.6)</td>
<td>2,145 (42.2)</td>
<td>2,770 (41.0)</td>
<td>2,728 (40.1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Missing</td>
<td>782 (3.4)</td>
<td>220 (2.8)</td>
<td>83 (1.6)</td>
<td>127 (1.9)</td>
<td>117 (1.7)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Smoking history (pack-years)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>None</td>
<td>11,810 (51.1)</td>
<td>4,306 (54.7)</td>
<td>2,919 (57.5)</td>
<td>3,752 (55.5)</td>
<td>3,641 (53.5)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Low (&lt;11.25)</td>
<td>7,004 (30.3)</td>
<td>2,154 (27.4)</td>
<td>1,430 (28.2)</td>
<td>1,912 (28.3)</td>
<td>1,906 (28.0)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>High (≥11.25)</td>
<td>3,952 (17.1)</td>
<td>1,306 (16.6)</td>
<td>692 (13.6)</td>
<td>1,044 (15.5)</td>
<td>1,221 (17.9)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Missing</td>
<td>345 (1.5)</td>
<td>100 (1.3)</td>
<td>38 (0.7)</td>
<td>49 (0.7)</td>
<td>35 (0.5)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">Alcohol consumption over past year (drinks per month)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Never in past year</td>
<td>8,379 (36.2)</td>
<td>2,262 (28.8)</td>
<td>1,331 (26.2)</td>
<td>1,667 (24.7)</td>
<td>1,565 (23.0)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;1.875</td>
<td>3,362 (14.5)</td>
<td>1,203 (15.3)</td>
<td>798 (15.7)</td>
<td>951 (14.1)</td>
<td>919 (13.5)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥1.875 -&lt; 14.5</td>
<td>5,887 (25.5)</td>
<td>2,344 (29.8)</td>
<td>1,648 (32.4)</td>
<td>2,226 (32.9)</td>
<td>2,140 (31.4)</td>
</tr>
</table>


<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 12" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Author Manuscript

<!-- PageFooter="Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01." -->


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Characteristic2</th>
<th colspan="5">Lifetime days of metolachlor use1, no lag</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>No use (n = 23,111)</th>
<th>Quartile 1 (n = 7,866)</th>
<th>Quartile 2 (n = 5,079)</th>
<th>Quartile 3 (n = 6,757)</th>
<th>Quartile 4 (n = 6,803)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥14.5</td>
<td>4,926 (21.3)</td>
<td>1,903 (24.2)</td>
<td>1,215 (23.9)</td>
<td>1,823 (27.0)</td>
<td>2,090 (30.7)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Missing</td>
<td>557 (2.4)</td>
<td>154 (2.0)</td>
<td>87 (1.7)</td>
<td>90 (1.3)</td>
<td>89 (1.3)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Education</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;High school</td>
<td>2,338 (10.1)</td>
<td>561 (7.1)</td>
<td>277 (5.5)</td>
<td>345 (5.1)</td>
<td>317 (4.7)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>High school graduate/GED</td>
<td>10,704 (46.3)</td>
<td>3,824 (48.6)</td>
<td>2,328 (45.8)</td>
<td>3,158 (46.7)</td>
<td>3,104 (45.6)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;High school</td>
<td>9,525 (41.2)</td>
<td>3,342 (42.5)</td>
<td>2,392 (47.1)</td>
<td>3,148 (46.6)</td>
<td>3,240 (47.6)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Missing</td>
<td>544 (2.4)</td>
<td>139 (1.8)</td>
<td>82 (1.6)</td>
<td>106 (1.6)</td>
<td>142 (2.1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>State of residence</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Iowa</td>
<td>13,202 (57.1)</td>
<td>5,725 (72.8)</td>
<td>4,037 (79.5)</td>
<td>5,422 (80.2)</td>
<td>5,162 (75.9)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>North Carolina</td>
<td>9,909 (42.9)</td>
<td>2,141 (27.2)</td>
<td>1,042 (20.5)</td>
<td>1,335 (19.8)</td>
<td>1,641 (24.1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Applicator type3</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Private</td>
<td>21,315 (92.2)</td>
<td>7,414 (94.3)</td>
<td>4,792 (94.3)</td>
<td>6,230 (92.2)</td>
<td>5,403 (79.4)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Commercial</td>
<td>1,796 (7.8)</td>
<td>452 (5.7)</td>
<td>287 (5.7)</td>
<td>527 (7.8)</td>
<td>1,400 (20.6)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Five most correlated4 pesticides</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Use of Imazethapyr</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td>17,360 (75.1)</td>
<td>4,247 (54.0)</td>
<td>2,128 (41.9)</td>
<td>2,375 (35.1)</td>
<td>2,085 (30.6)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>5,342 (23.1)</td>
<td>3,389 (43.1)</td>
<td>2,794 (55.0)</td>
<td>4,197 (62.1)</td>
<td>4,506 (66.2)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Missing</td>
<td>409 (1.8)</td>
<td>230 (2.9)</td>
<td>157 (3.1)</td>
<td>185 (2.7)</td>
<td>212 (3.1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Use of Alachlor</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td>14,800 (64.0)</td>
<td>3,384 (43.0)</td>
<td>1,723 (33.9)</td>
<td>2,197 (32.5)</td>
<td>1,735 (25.5)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>7,793 (33.7)</td>
<td>4,289 (54.5)</td>
<td>3,214 (63.3)</td>
<td>4,371 (64.7)</td>
<td>4,899 (72.0)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Missing</td>
<td>518 (2.2)</td>
<td>193 (2.5)</td>
<td>142 (2.8)</td>
<td>189 (2.8)</td>
<td>169 (2.5)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Use of Atrazine</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td>10,870 (47.0)</td>
<td>2,168 (27.6)</td>
<td>856 (16.9)</td>
<td>854 (12.6)</td>
<td>512 (7.5)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>11,796 (51.0)</td>
<td>5,586 (71.0)</td>
<td>4,177 (82.2)</td>
<td>5,836 (86.4)</td>
<td>6,231 (91.6)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Missing</td>
<td>445 (1.9)</td>
<td>112 (1.4)</td>
<td>46 (1.0)</td>
<td>67 (0.9)</td>
<td>60 (0.9)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Use of Dicamba</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td>14,927 (64.6)</td>
<td>3,695 (47.0)</td>
<td>1,821 (35.9)</td>
<td>2,123 (31.4)</td>
<td>1,835 (27.0)</td>
</tr>
</table>


Silver et al.

<!-- PageNumber="Page 13" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Characteristic2</th>
<th colspan="5">Lifetime days of metolachlor use1, no lag</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>No use (n = 23,111)</th>
<th>Quartile 1 (n = 7,866)</th>
<th>Quartile 2 (n = 5,079)</th>
<th>Quartile 3 (n = 6,757)</th>
<th>Quartile 4 (n = 6,803)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>7,440 (32.2)</td>
<td>3,905 (49.6)</td>
<td>3,089 (60.8)</td>
<td>4,456 (65.9)</td>
<td>4,752 (69.8)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Missing</td>
<td>744 (3.2)</td>
<td>266 (3.4)</td>
<td>169 (3.3)</td>
<td>178 (2.6)</td>
<td>216 (3.2)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Use of Trifluralin</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td>15,093 (65.3)</td>
<td>3,421 (43.5)</td>
<td>1,553 (30.6)</td>
<td>1,802 (26.7)</td>
<td>1,548 (22.8)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>7,155 (31.0)</td>
<td>4,184 (53.2)</td>
<td>3,373 (66.4)</td>
<td>4,759 (70.4)</td>
<td>5,047 (74.2)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Missing</td>
<td>863 (3.7)</td>
<td>261 (3.3)</td>
<td>153 (3.0)</td>
<td>196 (2.9)</td>
<td>208 (3.0)</td>
</tr>
</table>

1
Based on enrollment and first follow-up information. Metolachlor quartile cutpoints based on distribution of all cancer cases: (i) 0-≤18.75, (ii) >18.75-≤38.75, (iii) >38.75-≤113.5, (iv) >113.5 lifetime
days.

2
Demographic and lifestyle factors reported at enrollment.

3,
The term "private applicators" refers primarily to farmers and "commercial applicators" to professional pesticide applicators.

4\.
"Five most correlated pesticides determined by categorizing unlagged intensity-weighted lifetime days for each pesticide and calculating the correlation with quartiles of intensity-weighted lifetime days for
metolachlor.


<!-- PageFooter="Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 14" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Table 2

Rate ratios1 for all cancers with 20 or more exposed cases by quartiles of lifetime days and intensity-weighted lifetime days of metolachlor use among
Agricultural Health Study applicators (n = 26,505) who ever used metolachlor (with person-time in the low-metolachlor use category as referent), 5-year
lag

<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->
<!-- PageFooter="Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01." -->


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Cancer site</th>
<th colspan="3">Lifetime days</th>
<th colspan="2">Intensity-weighted lifetime days</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N2</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
<th>N ☒</th>
<th>RR (95% CI) p-Trend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>All cancers</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q13</td>
<td>699</td>
<td colspan="2">1.00 reference</td>
<td>694</td>
<td>1.00 reference</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>626</td>
<td colspan="2">1.00 (0.90-1.13)</td>
<td>604</td>
<td>0.96 (0.86-1.08)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>611</td>
<td colspan="2">1.00 (0.89-1.13)</td>
<td>610</td>
<td>0.97 (0.86-1.10)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>589</td>
<td colspan="2">0.97 (0.86-1.11) 0.64</td>
<td>613</td>
<td>0.92 (0.80-1.05) 0.27</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Bladder</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>33</td>
<td colspan="2">1.00</td>
<td>35</td>
<td>1.00</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>21</td>
<td colspan="2">0.67 (0.38-1.18)</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>0.59 (0.33-1.03)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>28</td>
<td colspan="2">0.86 (0.50-1.47)</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>0.60 (0.34-1.06)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>29</td>
<td colspan="2">0.84 (0.45-1.57) 0.92</td>
<td>32</td>
<td>0.75 (0.41-1.38) 0.80</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Brain</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>7</td>
<td colspan="2">1.00</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.00</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>7</td>
<td colspan="2">1.29 (0.43-3.86)</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0.52 (0.16-1.66)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>10</td>
<td colspan="2">1.70 (0.58-5.05)</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.89 (0.32-2.53)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>7</td>
<td colspan="2">1.71 (0.49-6.02) 0.41</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>1.10 (0.35-3.49) 0.57</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Colon</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


Q1

40

1.00

46

1.00

<!-- PageNumber="Page 15" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Cancer site</th>
<th colspan="3">Lifetime days</th>
<th colspan="3">Intensity-weighted lifetime days</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N2</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
<th>N</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>44</td>
<td>1.16 (0.73-1.84)</td>
<td></td>
<td>41</td>
<td>0.97 (0.62-1.52)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>1.20 (0.72-2.04)</td>
<td></td>
<td>43</td>
<td>1.00 (0.61-1.65)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>1.19 (0.72-1.97)</td>
<td>0.60</td>
<td>44</td>
<td>0.96 (0.57-1.63)</td>
<td>0.91</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Esophagus</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.26 (0.42-3.76)</td>
<td></td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0.59 (0.16-2.19)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.05 (0.33-3.35)</td>
<td></td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1.73 (0.63-4.73)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>1.81 (0.63-5.21)</td>
<td>0.27</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>1.58 (0.50-4.97)</td>
<td>0.24</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Kidney</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>19</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>1.14 (0.59-2.18)</td>
<td></td>
<td>21</td>
<td>1.01 (0.51-1.99)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>1.14 (0.57-2.27)</td>
<td></td>
<td>27</td>
<td>1.17 (0.60-2.28)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>0.89 (0.44-1.80)</td>
<td>0.59</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>0.69 (0.32-1.48)</td>
<td>0.24</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Liver</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>3</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>1.86 (0.31-11.1)</td>
<td></td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0.85 (0.16-4.52)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>3.13 (0.56-17.4)</td>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>1.83 (0.42-8.02)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>4.01 (0.68-23.5)</td>
<td>0.10</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.71 (0.33-8.83)</td>
<td>0.44</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Lung</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>49</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


Silver et al.

<!-- PageNumber="Page 16" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Cancer site</th>
<th colspan="3">Lifetime days</th>
<th colspan="3">Intensity-weighted lifetime days</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N2</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
<th>N</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>41</td>
<td>0.97 (0.63-1.51)</td>
<td></td>
<td>41</td>
<td>0.88 (0.54-1.44)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>51</td>
<td>1.17 (0.77-1.79)</td>
<td></td>
<td>50</td>
<td>1.07 (0.66-1.72)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>42</td>
<td>0.90 (0.55-1.48)</td>
<td>0.73</td>
<td>47</td>
<td>0.87 (0.52-1.44)</td>
<td>0.70</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Melanoma</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>38</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>1.10 (0.63-1.91)</td>
<td></td>
<td>17</td>
<td>0.54 (0.30-0.97)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>1.20 (0.68-2.10)</td>
<td></td>
<td>27</td>
<td>0.91 (0.52-1.60)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>1.19 (0.65-2.18)</td>
<td>0.60</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>1.03 (0.55-1.93)</td>
<td>0.43</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Oral cavity</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>14</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>2.34 (1.06-5.16)</td>
<td></td>
<td>12</td>
<td>1.06 (0.48-2.36)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>1.88 (0.82-4.31)</td>
<td></td>
<td>19</td>
<td>1.69 (0.79-3.61)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>1.78 (0.72-4.39)</td>
<td>0.63</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>1.66 (0.70-3.96)</td>
<td>0.21</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pancreas</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>12</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.82 (0.34-2.00)</td>
<td></td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1.33 (0.57-3.13)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.86 (0.35-2.11)</td>
<td></td>
<td>7</td>
<td>0.73 (0.26-2.03)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.94 (0.34-2.54)</td>
<td>0.99</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.88 (0.30-2.60)</td>
<td>0.57</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Prostate</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>306</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>292</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


Silver et al.

<!-- PageNumber="Page 17" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Cancer site</th>
<th colspan="3">Lifetime days</th>
<th colspan="3">Intensity-weighted lifetime days</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N2</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
<th>N</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>266</td>
<td>0.94 (0.80-1.12)</td>
<td></td>
<td>276</td>
<td>1.05 (0.88-1.24)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>255</td>
<td>0.93 (0.77-1.11)</td>
<td></td>
<td>245</td>
<td>0.94 (0.77-1.13)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>232</td>
<td>0.86 (0.70-1.04)</td>
<td>0.15</td>
<td>245</td>
<td>0.89 (0.72-1.10)</td>
<td>0.15</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Rectum</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>1.87 (0.86-4.07)</td>
<td></td>
<td>25</td>
<td>2.29 (0.95-5.54)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>1.84 (0.87-3.92)</td>
<td></td>
<td>23</td>
<td>2.16 (0.97-4.80)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>1.71 (0.75-3.90)</td>
<td>0.44</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>2.01 (0.80-5.06)</td>
<td>0.45</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Stomach</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>12</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0.84 (0.36-1.98)</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.82 (0.33-2.02)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0.95 (0.40-2.23)</td>
<td></td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0.94 (0.37-2.39)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0.41 (0.12-1.40)</td>
<td>0.18</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>0.68 (0.23-2.06)</td>
<td>0.57</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Testes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0.76 (0.23-2.49)</td>
<td></td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0.98 (0.32-3.06)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1.24 (0.42-3.62)</td>
<td></td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.83 (0.61-5.55)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>2.00 (0.58-6.91)</td>
<td>0.20</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>1.60 (0.34-7.56)</td>
<td>0.39</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Thyroid</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


Silver et al.

<!-- PageNumber="Page 18" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Cancer site</th>
<th colspan="3">Lifetime days</th>
<th colspan="3">Intensity-weighted lifetime days</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N2</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
<th>N</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>0.95 (0.31-2.92)</td>
<td></td>
<td>7</td>
<td>0.98 (0.34-2.80)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0.75 (0.22-2.56)</td>
<td></td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0.35 (0.08-1.61)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.24 (0.37-4.16)</td>
<td>0.68</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>0.93 (0.26-3.35)</td>
<td>0.91</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="7">Lymphohematopoietic malignancies</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>82</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>80</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>69</td>
<td>0.93 (0.67-1.30)</td>
<td></td>
<td>61</td>
<td>0.85 (0.60-1.20)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>55</td>
<td>0.79 (0.55-1.13)</td>
<td></td>
<td>63</td>
<td>0.87 (0.60-1.26)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>61</td>
<td>0.93 (0.64-1.36)</td>
<td>0.73</td>
<td>62</td>
<td>0.86 (0.57-1.29)</td>
<td>0.64</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Leukemia</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>14</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>0.99 (0.43-2.26)</td>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.51 (0.20-1.31)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0.46 (0.16-1.33)</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.65 (0.26-1.61)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0.83 (0.32-2.11)</td>
<td>0.61</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0.63 (0.24-1.67)</td>
<td>0.62</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="7">Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>66</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>64</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>51</td>
<td>0.87 (0.60-1.27)</td>
<td></td>
<td>50</td>
<td>0.90 (0.62-1.33)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>49</td>
<td>0.88 (0.59-1.30)</td>
<td></td>
<td>48</td>
<td>0.88 (0.59-1.33)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>0.97 (0.64-1.48)</td>
<td>0.94</td>
<td>52</td>
<td>0.95 (0.60-1.49)</td>
<td>0.95</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="6">Chronic/small/prolymphocytic/mantle B-cell NHL</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>17</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


Silver et al.

<!-- PageNumber="Page 19" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Cancer site</th>
<th colspan="3">Lifetime days</th>
<th colspan="3">Intensity-weighted lifetime days</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N2</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
<th>N</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>0.95 (0.47-1.92)</td>
<td></td>
<td>16</td>
<td>1.20 (0.58-2.47)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>1.12 (0.55-2.29)</td>
<td></td>
<td>20</td>
<td>1.36 (0.64-2.88)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>0.98 (0.44-2.16)</td>
<td>0.98</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>1.11 (0.46-2.69)</td>
<td>0.93</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="7">Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>15</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>0.90 (0.39-2.07)</td>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.61 (0.25-1.49)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.72 (0.28-1.89)</td>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.50 (0.18-1.35)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.76 (0.28-2.05)</td>
<td>0.57</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>0.83 (0.30-2.26)</td>
<td>0.96</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="7">Follicular cell lymphoma</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>2.48 (0.84-7.32)</td>
<td></td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1.08 (0.36-3.24)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.84 (0.53-6.34)</td>
<td></td>
<td>10</td>
<td>2.04 (0.71-5.88)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>3.24 (0.96-11.0)</td>
<td>0.14</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>2.08 (0.61-7.10)</td>
<td>0.21</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="7">Multiple myeloma</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>0.42 (0.15-1.14)</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.77 (0.30-1.99)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.54 (0.22-1.35)</td>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.79 (0.30-2.12)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0.74 (0.29-1.88)</td>
<td>0.93</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.04 (0.37-2.93)</td>
<td>0.76</td>
</tr>
</table>

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.

1
Adjusted for age, smoking, alcohol, applicator status (private or commercial), family history of cancer (any site), state of residence and the pesticides most highly correlated with metolachlor (imazethapyr,
alachlor, atrazine, dicamba, trifluralin). All cancers combined also adjusted for sex and race. Lung and prostate cancers also adjusted for race.

2\.
-Median number of cases over five imputations.


<!-- PageNumber="Page 20" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="Page 21" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01." -->
<!-- PageFooter="Silver et al." -->

Subtypes for non-Hodgkin lymphoma as defined by Morton et al. 16

≤1,403, Q3>1,403-≤4,103, Q4>4,103 units.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
For lifetime-days analyses with a 5-year lag, Q1 >0-≤15 days, Q2 >15-≤38.75 days, Q3 >38.75-≤108.5 days, Q4 >108.5 days. For intensity-weighted lifetime-days analyses, Q1 >0-≤490, Q2 >490-

Author Manuscript

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Table 3

Rate ratios1 for cancers with at least 20 exposed cases by quartiles of lifetime exposure days and intensity-weighted lifetime exposure days to metolachlor
among Agricultural Health Study cohort applicators (with unexposed person-time as the referent), 5-year lag

<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->
<!-- PageFooter="Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01." -->


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Cancer site</th>
<th colspan="2">Lifetime days</th>
<th colspan="3">Intensity-weighted lifetime days</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N2</th>
<th>RR (95% CI) p-Trend</th>
<th>N</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>All cancers</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>3,248</td>
<td>1.00 (referent)</td>
<td>3,248</td>
<td>1.00 (referent)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q13</td>
<td>619</td>
<td>0.95 (0.86-1.04)</td>
<td>619</td>
<td>0.98 (0.89-1.08)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>626</td>
<td>0.96 (0.88-1.06)</td>
<td>604</td>
<td>0.95 (0.86-1.05)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>611</td>
<td>0.97 (0.88-1.06)</td>
<td>610</td>
<td>0.96 (0.87-1.07)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>589</td>
<td>0.94 (0.85-1.04) 0.30</td>
<td>613</td>
<td>0.92 (0.83-1.02)</td>
<td>0.14</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Bladder</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>168</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>168</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>32</td>
<td>0.99 (0.65-1.51)</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>1.11 (0.74-1.68)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>0.64 (0.39-1.06)</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>0.64 (0.39-1.05)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>0.88 (0.56-1.40)</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>0.70 (0.43-1.15)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>0.92 (0.58-1.48) 0.74</td>
<td>32</td>
<td>0.98 (0.63-1.54)</td>
<td>0.74</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Brain</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>38</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td>38</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>0.81 (0.32-2.04)</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.19 (0.56-2.57)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>0.91 (0.38-2.17)</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0.57 (0.20-1.67)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.20 (0.53-2.71)</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>1.01 (0.42-2.46)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


<!-- PageNumber="Page 22" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Cancer site</th>
<th colspan="3">Lifetime days</th>
<th colspan="3">Intensity-weighted lifetime days</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N2</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
<th>N</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.21 (0.47-3.08)</td>
<td>0.56</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>1.31 (0.52-3.29)</td>
<td>0.59</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Colon</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>241</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>241</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>38</td>
<td>0.80 (0.55-1.16)</td>
<td></td>
<td>44</td>
<td>0.94 (0.65-1.36)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>44</td>
<td>0.89 (0.61-1.30)</td>
<td></td>
<td>41</td>
<td>0.85 (0.59-1.23)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>0.90 (0.62-1.31)</td>
<td></td>
<td>43</td>
<td>0.86 (0.60-1.24)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>0.88 (0.60-1.28)</td>
<td>0.60</td>
<td>44</td>
<td>0.81 (0.55-1.19)</td>
<td>0.28</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Esophagus</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>40</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>40</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>0.78 (0.32-1.89)</td>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.84 (0.35-2.00)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.95 (0.41-2.23)</td>
<td></td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0.47 (0.16-1.35)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>0.82 (0.34-1.95)</td>
<td></td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1.35 (0.67-2.72)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>1.33 (0.61-2.88)</td>
<td>0.45</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>1.16 (0.52-2.61)</td>
<td>0.47</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Kidney</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>112</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>112</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>0.84 (0.49-1.45)</td>
<td></td>
<td>17</td>
<td>0.90 (0.52-1.57)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>0.97 (0.58-1.60)</td>
<td></td>
<td>21</td>
<td>0.92 (0.55-1.55)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>1.03 (0.63-1.70)</td>
<td></td>
<td>27</td>
<td>1.16 (0.72-1.87)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>0.86 (0.50-1.50)</td>
<td>0.74</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>0.74 (0.42-1.30)</td>
<td>0.44</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Liver</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


Silver et al.

<!-- PageNumber="Page 23" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Silver et al.

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Cancer site</th>
<th colspan="3">Lifetime days</th>
<th colspan="3">Intensity-weighted lifetime days</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N2</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
<th>N</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>15</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0.97 (0.17-5.50)</td>
<td></td>
<td>3</td>
<td>1.65 (0.37-7.23)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>1.79 (0.54-5.93)</td>
<td></td>
<td>3</td>
<td>1.33 (0.35-4.99)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>3.06 (1.05-8.90)</td>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>3.14 (1.11-8.88)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>3.99 (1.43-11.1)</td>
<td>&lt;0.01</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>3.18 (1.10-9.22)</td>
<td>0.03</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Lung</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>330</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>330</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>0.81 (0.58-1.14)</td>
<td></td>
<td>43</td>
<td>0.86 (0.60-1.24)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>42</td>
<td>0.77 (0.54-1.10)</td>
<td></td>
<td>41</td>
<td>0.75 (0.51-1.10)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>51</td>
<td>0.91 (0.65-1.28)</td>
<td></td>
<td>50</td>
<td>0.89 (0.63-1.26)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>42</td>
<td>0.70 (0.47-1.02)</td>
<td>0.12</td>
<td>47</td>
<td>0.72 (0.49-1.05)</td>
<td>0.13</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Melanoma</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>134</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>134</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>0.86 (0.54-1.38)</td>
<td></td>
<td>33</td>
<td>1.15 (0.75-1.76)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>1.00 (0.64-1.57)</td>
<td></td>
<td>17</td>
<td>0.63 (0.36-1.09)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>1.09 (0.69-1.71)</td>
<td></td>
<td>27</td>
<td>1.06 (0.66-1.69)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>1.07 (0.66-1.74)</td>
<td>0.64</td>
<td>31</td>
<td>1.20 (0.74-1.94)</td>
<td>0.44</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Oral cavity</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>69</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>69</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.63 (0.30-1.34)</td>
<td></td>
<td>13</td>
<td>0.87 (0.45-1.67)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


<!-- PageNumber="Page 24" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Cancer site</th>
<th colspan="3">Lifetime days</th>
<th colspan="3">Intensity-weighted lifetime days</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N2</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
<th>N</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>1.41 (0.82-2.44)</td>
<td></td>
<td>12</td>
<td>0.85 (0.44-1.64)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>1.14 (0.63-2.07)</td>
<td></td>
<td>19</td>
<td>1.36 (0.76-2.41)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>1.08 (0.56-2.10)</td>
<td>0.64</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>1.29 (0.68-2.45)</td>
<td>0.28</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pancreas</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>73</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>73</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>0.72 (0.36-1.44)</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.59 (0.27-1.28)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.64 (0.31-1.34)</td>
<td></td>
<td>13</td>
<td>0.95 (0.50-1.79)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.61 (0.29-1.30)</td>
<td></td>
<td>7</td>
<td>0.49 (0.22-1.12)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.64 (0.29-1.42)</td>
<td>0.25</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.60 (0.27-1.32)</td>
<td>0.15</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Prostate</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>1,242</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>1,242</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>276</td>
<td>1.04 (0.91-1.20)</td>
<td></td>
<td>261</td>
<td>1.00 (0.86-1.16)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>266</td>
<td>1.00 (0.86-1.15)</td>
<td></td>
<td>272</td>
<td>1.07 (0.93-1.23)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>255</td>
<td>0.98 (0.84-1.15)</td>
<td></td>
<td>245</td>
<td>0.96 (0.82-1.13)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>232</td>
<td>0.92 (0.78-1.08)</td>
<td>0.25</td>
<td>245</td>
<td>0.92 (0.78-1.08)</td>
<td>0.26</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Rectum</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>104</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>104</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>0.66 (0.35-1.26)</td>
<td></td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0.55 (0.28-1.11)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>1.29 (0.79-2.12)</td>
<td></td>
<td>25</td>
<td>1.38 (0.83-2.28)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>1.32 (0.80-2.18)</td>
<td></td>
<td>22</td>
<td>1.36 (0.81-2.29)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


Silver et al.

<!-- PageNumber="Page 25" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Cancer site</th>
<th colspan="3">Lifetime days</th>
<th colspan="3">Intensity-weighted lifetime days</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N2</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
<th>N</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>1.32 (0.76-2.28)</td>
<td>0.18</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>1.37 (0.79-2.36)</td>
<td>0.14</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Stomach</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>47</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>47</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1.68 (0.87-3.26)</td>
<td></td>
<td>12</td>
<td>1.64 (0.82-3.29)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.18 (0.55-2.52)</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.14 (0.52-2.51)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.25 (0.59-2.64)</td>
<td></td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.18 (0.54-2.56)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0.52 (0.17-1.58)</td>
<td>0.25</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>0.82 (0.34-2.02)</td>
<td>0.61</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Testes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>23</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>1.47 (0.62-3.46)</td>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>1.20 (0.48-2.96)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0.90 (0.29-2.77)</td>
<td></td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0.97 (0.34-2.73)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1.28 (0.48-3.38)</td>
<td></td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.44 (0.56-3.75)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>1.47 (0.47-4.62)</td>
<td>0.56</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0.80 (0.20-3.14)</td>
<td>0.91</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Thyroid</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>39</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>39</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>0.81 (0.33-2.00)</td>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.93 (0.38-2.24)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>0.79 (0.31-2.01)</td>
<td></td>
<td>7</td>
<td>0.96 (0.40-2.28)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0.65 (0.23-1.84)</td>
<td></td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0.37 (0.10-1.43)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.05 (0.41-2.71)</td>
<td>0.98</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.00 (0.38-2.61)</td>
<td>0.76</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="7">Lymphohematopoietic malignancies</td>
</tr>
</table>


Silver et al.

<!-- PageNumber="Page 26" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Cancer site</th>
<th colspan="3">Lifetime days</th>
<th colspan="3">Intensity-weighted lifetime days</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N2</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
<th>N</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>307</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>307</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>70</td>
<td>1.11 (0.84-1.48)</td>
<td></td>
<td>67</td>
<td>1.11 (0.83-1.48)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>69</td>
<td>1.12 (0.84-1.49)</td>
<td></td>
<td>61</td>
<td>1.01 (0.74-1.38)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>55</td>
<td>0.95 (0.69-1.30)</td>
<td></td>
<td>63</td>
<td>1.06 (0.78-1.45)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>61</td>
<td>1.13 (0.82-1.56)</td>
<td>0.66</td>
<td>62</td>
<td>1.06 (0.77-1.47)</td>
<td>0.74</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Leukemia</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>52</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>52</td>
<td>1.00 referent</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>1.26 (0.61-2.57)</td>
<td></td>
<td>12</td>
<td>1.43 (0.72-2.87)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>12</td>
<td>1.38 (0.68-2.79)</td>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.82 (0.35-1.95)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0.68 (0.26-1.80)</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1.20 (0.55-2.60)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.40 (0.64-3.08)</td>
<td>0.67</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.34 (0.60-2.98)</td>
<td>0.52</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="7">Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>247</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>247</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>55</td>
<td>1.09 (0.79-1.50)</td>
<td></td>
<td>53</td>
<td>1.05 (0.76-1.45)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>52</td>
<td>1.03 (0.74-1.44)</td>
<td></td>
<td>51</td>
<td>1.04 (0.74-1.45)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>1.04 (0.74-1.45)</td>
<td></td>
<td>51</td>
<td>1.02 (0.72-1.44)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>1.13 (0.80-1.61)</td>
<td>0.55</td>
<td>53</td>
<td>1.09 (0.76-1.56)</td>
<td>0.68</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="6">Chronic/small/prolymphocytic/mantle B-cell NHL</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>72</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>72</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>1.10 (0.60-2.03)</td>
<td></td>
<td>14</td>
<td>0.85 (0.44-1.64)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


Silver et al.

<!-- PageNumber="Page 27" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Cancer site</th>
<th colspan="3">Lifetime days</th>
<th colspan="3">Intensity-weighted lifetime days</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N2</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
<th>N</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>1.12 (0.63-2.00)</td>
<td></td>
<td>16</td>
<td>1.17 (0.65-2.11)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>1.36 (0.77-2.39)</td>
<td></td>
<td>20</td>
<td>1.38 (0.78-2.42)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1.32 (0.69-2.52)</td>
<td>0.69</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>1.20 (0.62-2.35)</td>
<td>0.41</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>64</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>64</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.67 (0.30-1.48)</td>
<td></td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0.85 (0.41-1.78)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>0.88 (0.44-1.76)</td>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.68 (0.31-1.48)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.69 (0.31-1.54)</td>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.54 (0.22-1.29)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.64 (0.28-1.47)</td>
<td>0.30</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>0.83 (0.38-1.80)</td>
<td>0.52</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">Follicular cell lymphoma</td>
<td colspan="4"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>24</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0.93 (0.31-2.79)</td>
<td></td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1.37 (0.52-3.57)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>2.43 (1.07-5.52)</td>
<td></td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1.45 (0.56-3.78)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1.76 (0.64-4.81)</td>
<td></td>
<td>10</td>
<td>2.67 (1.10-6.49)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>2.89 (1.13-7.38)</td>
<td>0.03</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>2.57 (0.95-6.95)</td>
<td>0.04</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">Multiple myeloma</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Unexposed</td>
<td>52</td>
<td>1.00</td>
<td></td>
<td>52</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q1</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>1.46 (0.77-2.78)</td>
<td></td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.13 (0.54-2.34)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q2</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>0.63 (0.25-1.60)</td>
<td></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0.87 (0.39-1.92)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q3</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.86 (0.39-1.92)</td>
<td></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.94 (0.42-2.12)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


Silver et al.

<!-- PageNumber="Page 28" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->

Author Manuscript

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->


<table>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Cancer site</th>
<th colspan="3">Lifetime days</th>
<th colspan="3">Intensity-weighted lifetime days</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>N2</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
<th>N</th>
<th>RR (95% CI)</th>
<th>p-Trend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Q4</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.20 (0.55-2.60)</td>
<td>0.87</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.27 (0.59-2.72)</td>
<td>0.60</td>
</tr>
</table>

1
Adjusted for age, smoking, alcohol, applicator status (private or commercial), family history of cancer (any site), state of residence and the pesticides most highly correlated with metolachlor (alachlor,
atrazine, dicamba, imazethapyr, trifluralin). All cancers combined also adjusted for sex and race. Lung and prostate cancers also adjusted for race.


2\.
-Median number of cases over five imputations.

3\.
For lifetime-days analyses with a 5-year lag, unexposed = 0 days, Q1 >0-≤15 days, Q2 >15-≤38.75 days, Q3 >38.75-≤108.5 days, Q4 >108.5 days. For intensity-weighted lifetime-days analyses,
unexposed = 0 days, Q1 >0-≤490, Q2>490-≤1,403, Q3>1,403-≤4,103, Q4>4,103 units.

Subtypes for non-Hodgkin lymphoma as defined by Morton et al. 16

<!-- PageHeader="Silver et al." -->

Int J Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.

<!-- PageNumber="Page 29" -->
