<figure>

NE

</figure>


<!-- PageHeader="American Journal of Epidemiology Copyright @ 2004 by the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health All rights reserved" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Vol. 160, No. 9 Printed in U.S.A. DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwh290" -->


# Pesticides and Lung Cancer Risk in the Agricultural Health Study Cohort

Michael C. R. Alavanja1, Mustafa Dosemeci1, Claudine Samanic1, Jay Lubin1, Charles F.
Lynch2, Charles Knott3, Joseph Barker4, Jane A. Hoppin5, Dale P. Sandler5, Joseph Coble1,
Kent Thomas6, and Aaron Blair1

1 Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD.

2 Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA.

3 Battelle/Centers for Public Health Research and Evaluation, Durham, NC.

4 IMS, Inc., Silver Spring, MD.

5 National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC.

6 Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC.

Received for publication April 7, 2004; accepted for publication May 18, 2004.

The authors examined the relation between 50 widely used agricultural pesticides and lung cancer incidence
in the Agricultural Health Study, a prospective cohort study of 57,284 pesticide applicators and 32,333 spouses
of farmer applicators with no prior history of lung cancer. Self-administered questionnaires were completed at
enrollment (1993-1997). Cancer incidence was determined through population-based cancer registries from
enrollment through December 31, 2001. A lung cancer standardized incidence ratio of 0.44 (95% confidence
interval: 0.39, 0.49) was observed overall, due in large part to a low cigarette smoking prevalence. Two widely
used herbicides, metolachlor and pendimethalin (for low-exposed groups to four higher exposure categories:
odds ratio (OR) = 1.0, 1.6, 1.2, 5.0; Ptrend = 0.0002; and OR = 1.0, 1.6, 2.1, 4.4; Ptrend = 0.003, respectively), and
two widely used insecticides, chlorpyrifos and diazinon (OR = 1.0, 1.1, 1.7, 1.9; Ptrend = 0.03; and OR = 1.0, 1.6,
2.7, 3.7; Ptrend = 0.04, respectively), showed some evidence of exposure response for lung cancer. These
excesses could not be explained by previously identified lung cancer risk factors. The usage levels in this cohort
are considerably higher than those typically experienced by the general population. An excess risk among
spouses directly exposed to pesticides could not be evaluated at this time.

lung neoplasms; pesticides

Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio.

Lung cancer is one of the most frequently diagnosed
cancers in the world, and it is the leading cause of cancer
death (1). Incidence and mortality trends for lung cancer
closely parallel patterns of cigarette smoking, and it is esti-
mated that cigarette smoking is associated with over 85
percent of all lung cancer in Western countries (1). As a
group, farmers in most of these Western countries smoke
less than the general population and, as a consequence,
farmers usually experience a significantly reduced risk of
lung cancer and other chronic diseases (2).

Lung cancer risk is causally associated with exposure to
arsenical compounds (3), and an excess risk of lung cancer
was observed among vineyard workers exposed to arsenic-

based pesticides (4) and among arsenical pesticide manufac-
turers (5, 6). A variety of other pesticides have caused lung
tumors in rodent bioassays, but the epidemiologic data
supporting an association for nonarsenical pesticides and
lung cancer risk in humans are mixed (7). In a study by Blair
et al. (8) and a follow-up study by Pesatori et al. (9) of
licensed pesticide applicators in Florida, the risk of lung
cancer rose with the number of years licensed, with a stan-
dardized mortality ratio greater than 2.0 among those
licensed for 20 years or more. In a survey of 1,600 agricul-
tural applicators in East Germany, Barthel (9) observed
almost a twofold excess mortality from lung cancer. The risk
increased to 3.0 among those with 20 or more years of expo-

<!-- PageFooter="Reprint requests to Dr. Michael C. Alavanja, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 6120 Executive Boulevard, Room 8000, Rockville, MD 20892 (e-mail: alavanjm@mail.nih.gov)." -->
<!-- PageNumber="876" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Am J Epidemiol 2004;160:876-885" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/160/9/876/86424 by Health & Welfare Canada user on 09 March 2026" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Pesticides and Lung Cancer Risk 877" -->

sure (10). Although the specific agent(s) associated with the
excess risk were not identified by Blair et al. or Barthel,
Pesatori et al. observed lung cancer excesses with organo-
phosphate and carbamate insecticides and phenoxyacetic
acid herbicides (9).

A relation between exposure to phenoxy herbicides and/or
contaminants (dioxins and furans) and lung cancer mortality
was also observed in a cohort of workers from four manufac-
turing plants in Germany (11) and in a pooled analysis of 36
cohorts from 12 countries (12). Other studies of pesticide
applicators (13, 14) and pesticide manufacturers (15-17),
however, did not show any excess risk of lung cancer. The
limited assessment of exposure, smaller sample size, and
inadequate control of cigarette smoking in many of these
studies underscore the need for improved investigations that
focus on specific chemicals.

We examined the exposure-response relation between 50
important agricultural pesticides and lung cancer incidence
in the Agricultural Health Study cohort while controlling for
many known or suspected risk factors for lung cancer (1, 18-
23).


## MATERIALS AND METHODS


### Cohort enrollment

The Agricultural Health Study is a prospective cohort
study of 89,658 people, including 52,395 private applicators
and 4,916 commercial applicators licensed to apply
restricted-use pesticides and 32,347 spouses of private appli-
cators from Iowa and North Carolina. Private applicators
were farmers or nursery workers, and commercial applica-
tors were persons employed by pest control companies or
businesses that use pesticides. Pesticide applicators were
enrolled when they completed an enrollment questionnaire.
In Iowa, both commercial and farmer applicators attend the
same pesticide certification testing sessions, and both were
invited to participate in the study. In North Carolina, because
private applicators attended separate training, only private
applicators were enrolled. Private and commercial applica-
tors were also asked to complete "take-home" questionnaires
that sought more extensive information on occupational
activities. Recruitment of applicators and their spouses
began in December 1993 and continued until December
1997.


### Questionnaires

The enrollment questionnaire sought information on the
use of 50 pesticides (ever/never), crops grown and livestock
raised, pesticide application methods used, personal protec-
tive equipment used, other agricultural activities and expo-
sures, smoking, alcohol consumption, fruit and vegetable
intake, medical conditions, medical conditions in first-
degree relatives including a history of lung cancer, and basic
demographic data (all questionnaires and publications
resulting from this study are listed at http://
www.aghealth.org). For 22 of the 50 pesticides in the appli-
cator enrollment questionnaire, we also obtained informa-
tion on the duration of use (years), frequency of use (days

per year) and information on application methods, and use of
protective equipment. For the remaining 28 pesticides listed
in the enrollment questionnaire, exposure information was
limited to ever versus never used. The take home question-
naire for applicators included detailed use information on the
28 pesticides reported as ever/never use in the enrollment
questionnaire, more detailed information on personal protec-
tive equipment use, lifestyle characteristics, height and
weight (used for body mass index), farm and nonfarm occu-
pational exposure, multiple vitamin use, and hours spent in
strenuous physical activity. The spouse questionnaire
collected information only on ever/never use of the same 50
pesticides.


### Cohort follow-up

Cohort members were matched to cancer registry files in
Iowa and North Carolina for incident cancer identification
and to the state death registries and to the National Death
Index to ascertain vital status. One lung cancer case diag-
nosed after enrollment was excluded from the analyses
because an earlier diagnosis of lung cancer was made prior to
enrollment. Incident cancers were identified from enroll-
ment (i.e., 1993-1997) through December 31, 2001. Study
subjects alive but no longer residing in Iowa or North Caro-
lina (n = 875) were identified through personal contacts with
the study subject, motor vehicle records, pesticide registra-
tion records, and the current address records of the Internal
Revenue Service, and they were censored in the year they
left the state.


### Analysis

A standardized incidence ratio for lung cancer (controlling
for age, gender, and race) was computed relative to the popu-
lations of Iowa and North Carolina. Statistical significance
of the standardized incidence ratios and 95 percent confi-
dence intervals was based on standard methods (24, 25).

Since the follow-up period for case ascertainment was
about 6 years and the lung cancer incidence rate did not vary
appreciably, unconditional multivariate logistic regression
(26) was used to compare lung cancer cases with noncases
on a number of factors possibly associated with lung cancer
risk. The odds ratio resulting from this procedure closely
approximates the relative risk (26). In the analysis, we exam-
ined 50 pesticides using two different indices of exposure
(i.e., lifetime exposure days and intensity-weighted lifetime
exposure days) and other agricultural activities and expo-
sures.

We replicated all analyses using two different reference
groups to assess the risk associated with pesticide use. The
first reference group included all applicators who did not
mix or apply the specific pesticide. They were compared
with exposed applicators grouped into three tertiles of pesti-
cide use (lifetime days of use). The second reference group
included applicators in the lowest tertile of specific pesticide
use excluding never users, with the two tertiles of higher use
as the exposed groups. In either analysis, if the upper tertile
contained 10 or more exposed cases, it was further divided in
two for the exposure response analysis. For the 22 pesticides

<!-- PageFooter="Am J Epidemiol 2004;160:876-885" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/160/9/876/86424 by Health & Welfare Canada user on 09 March 2026" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="878 Alavanja et al." -->


<table>
<caption>TABLE 1. Characteristics of licensed pesticide applicators and relations with the risk of lung cancer, Agricultural Health Study, 1993-2001</caption>
<tr>
<th>Characteristic</th>
<th>No. of lung cancer cases*</th>
<th>No. of cohort members (noncases)*</th>
<th>Adjusted odds ratiot</th>
<th>95% confidence interval</th>
<th>Ptrend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>240</td>
<td>57,044</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Age (years)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;55 (referent)</td>
<td>38</td>
<td>40,009</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;0.001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>55-59</td>
<td>41</td>
<td>5,598</td>
<td>5.7</td>
<td>3.3, 10.0</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>60-64</td>
<td>57</td>
<td>4,848</td>
<td>9.8</td>
<td>5.8, 16.7</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>65-69</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>3,482</td>
<td>11.3</td>
<td>6.4, 19.9</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>70-74</td>
<td>35</td>
<td>1,985</td>
<td>17.2</td>
<td>9.3, 32.0</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥75</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>1,120</td>
<td>14.9</td>
<td>6.7, 33.0</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Smoking status (pack-years)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Never (referent)</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>29,237</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;0.001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Former: &lt; 3.75</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>5,564</td>
<td>1.1</td>
<td>0.3, 4.0</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Former: 3.75-15</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>5,083</td>
<td>3.3</td>
<td>1.4, 7.5</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Former: &gt;15</td>
<td>77</td>
<td>4,815</td>
<td>13.8</td>
<td>7.3, 26.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Current: &lt; 11.25</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>3,178</td>
<td>8.3</td>
<td>3.2, 21.6</td>
<td>&lt;0.001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Current: 11.25-28.5</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>2,891</td>
<td>21.8</td>
<td>10.3, 46.0</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Current: &gt;28.5</td>
<td>54</td>
<td>2,962</td>
<td>24.5</td>
<td>12.6, 47.8</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Sex</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male</td>
<td>237</td>
<td>55,484</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Female</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>1,560</td>
<td>1.3</td>
<td>0.4, 4.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Race</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>White</td>
<td>223</td>
<td>54,244</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>NAţ</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Black/other</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>1,515</td>
<td>2.1</td>
<td>0.97,4.2</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>State of residence</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Iowa</td>
<td>82</td>
<td>36,698</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>NA</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>North Carolina</td>
<td>158</td>
<td>20,346</td>
<td>1.4</td>
<td>0.97,2.0</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Education (years)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;12 (referent)</td>
<td>75</td>
<td>5,290</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.09</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>12</td>
<td>104</td>
<td>25,995</td>
<td>0.8</td>
<td>0.5, 1.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;12</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>23,343</td>
<td>0.7</td>
<td>0.4, 1.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


Table continues

included in the enrollment questionnaire, exposure informa-
tion included 1) application-days/year; 2) total years of
exposure; and 3) an exposure "intensity index" that includes
information about the application method, whether the appli-
cator repaired his/her own pesticide application equipment,
and the use of protective equipment (27). Two exposure
indices derived from these questionnaires and used in the
analysis included 1) lifetime exposure days that were
computed as follows: (application-days per year) x (total
years of exposure) and 2) intensity-weighted days that were
computed as follows: (application-days per year) x (total
years of exposure) x (exposure intensity index). Similar
detail for the remaining 28 pesticides was available only for
the subset of applicators who returned the take-home ques-
tionnaire. Results for the 22 pesticides covered in detail on
the enrollment questionnaire were compared for those who
did and did not complete the take-home questionnaire. We
could not assess risk among spouses who personally applied
specific pesticides, because there were fewer than five lung

cancer cases exposed to any single pesticide. We used a
linear trend test to assess exposure response in applicators,
treating the cumulative score as a continuous variable and
also by treating the median of each exposure category as the
quantitative score.

All odds ratios were adjusted for age as a categorical vari-
able (<55, 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, 70-74, and ≥75 years),
gender, smoking history by pack-years of exposure sepa-
rately for current and former smokers (as a categorical vari-
able), and total pesticide application days of any pesticide
(continuous variable). We referred to this model as the
"reduced model." To control more fully for potential
confounders, we also included variables for nonfarm occu-
pational exposures, regular recreational physical activity,
alcohol consumption, fruit and vegetable intake, body mass
index, medical conditions, medical conditions in first-degree
relatives including a history of lung cancer, race, state of
residence, license type, and education. This is referred to as
the "comprehensive model." No meaningful differences

<!-- PageFooter="Am J Epidemiol 2004;160:876-885" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/160/9/876/86424 by Health & Welfare Canada user on 09 March 2026" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Pesticides and Lung Cancer Risk 879" -->


<table>
<caption>TABLE 1. Continued</caption>
<tr>
<th>Characteristic</th>
<th>No. of lung cancer cases*</th>
<th>No. of cohort members (noncases)*</th>
<th>Adjusted odds ratiot</th>
<th>95% confidence interval</th>
<th>Ptrend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pneumonia</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No (referent)</td>
<td>147</td>
<td>45,020</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>NA</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>59</td>
<td>8,758</td>
<td>1.5</td>
<td>1.0, 2.2</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Other chronic lung disease (bronchitis and emphysema)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No (referent)</td>
<td>172</td>
<td>50,869</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>37</td>
<td>2,582</td>
<td>2.0</td>
<td>1.2, 3.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Asthma</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No (referent)</td>
<td>193</td>
<td>50,676</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>3,130</td>
<td>0.8</td>
<td>0.4, 1.5</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Family history of lung cancer</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No (referent)</td>
<td>180</td>
<td>48,830</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>NA</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>3,347</td>
<td>0.7</td>
<td>0.4, 1.3</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Vegetables (servings/week)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≤4 (referent)</td>
<td>76</td>
<td>17,452</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.13</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5-7</td>
<td>77</td>
<td>18,838</td>
<td>1.2</td>
<td>0.8, 1.8</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;7</td>
<td>53</td>
<td>15,769</td>
<td>0.8</td>
<td>0.5, 1.2</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fruits (servings/week)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≤2 (referent)</td>
<td>83</td>
<td>17,407</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.64</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>3-6</td>
<td>82</td>
<td>20,817</td>
<td>0.8</td>
<td>0.5, 1.2</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥7</td>
<td>48</td>
<td>14,681</td>
<td>0.9</td>
<td>0.5, 1.4</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Alcohol intake (servings/time period)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Never (referent)</td>
<td>103</td>
<td>17,352</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.45</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≤3/month</td>
<td>41</td>
<td>17,186</td>
<td>0.7</td>
<td>0.5, 1.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥1/week</td>
<td>69</td>
<td>18,858</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>0.7, 1.5</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>

\* Missing data for some questions are responsible for differences in total cell counts.

t Odds ratios adjusted for all the other variables listed in the table.

\# NA, not applicable.


were found between the exposure response when analyzed as
a continuous or categorical variable, so only the categorical
analysis results are presented. We computed odds ratios
using both the reduced model and the comprehensive model.
Since the odds ratios for lung cancer did not vary by more
than 10 percent for any pesticide examined, we report results
of the reduced model here. Trends in lung cancer risk also
did not vary meaningfully when numbers of cigarettes
smoked per day or duration of cigarette smoking in years
was substituted for pack-years, so pack-years were used in
all analyses. Institutional review boards approved the study
proposal and the manner in which informed consent was
obtained from study participants.


## RESULTS

This analysis included both the 57,284 certified/licensed
pesticide applicators and 32,333 spouses of private applica-
tors with no history of lung cancer at enrollment. There were
too few cases among commercial applicators to present anal-

ysis by individual license type at this time. A total of 2,209
deaths occurred among applicators during the mean follow-
up period of 6.2 years, and 300 incident lung cancers were
observed between enrollment and December 31, 2001.
Based on state incidence rates, 622 lung cancer cases were
expected, yielding a lung cancer standardized incidence ratio
of 0.44 (95 percent confidence interval (CI): 0.39, 0.49).

Smoking cigarettes was a strong risk factor for lung cancer
in the Agricultural Health Study cohort for both pesticide
applicators (table 1) and spouses (table 2). Other significant
lung cancer risk factors among pesticide applicators include
age, a history of pneumonia, and other chronic respiratory
diseases (i.e., bronchitis or emphysema) but not asthma.
Elevated but nonsignificant excess lung cancer risks were
observed among non-White compared with White applica-
tors and among North Carolina applicators compared with
Iowa applicators. Among spouses, age, emphysema, and
chronic bronchitis were enumerated separately in their ques-
tionnaire, but no chronic lung disease, race, state of resi-
dence, or pneumonia was a significant risk factor for lung

<!-- PageFooter="Am J Epidemiol 2004;160:876-885" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/160/9/876/86424 by Health & Welfare Canada user on 09 March 2026" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="880 Alavanja et al." -->


<table>
<caption>TABLE 2. Characteristics of spouses of licensed private pesticide applicators and relations with the risk of lung cancer, Agricultural Health Study, 1993-2001</caption>
<tr>
<th>Characteristic</th>
<th>No. of lung cancer cases*</th>
<th>No. of cohort members (noncases)*</th>
<th>Adjusted odds ratiot</th>
<th>95% confidence interval</th>
<th>Ptrend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>60</td>
<td>32,273</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Age (years)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;55 (referent)</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>22,679</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;0.001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>55-59</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>3,667</td>
<td>0.92</td>
<td>0.3, 3.2</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>60-64</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>2,904</td>
<td>1.8</td>
<td>0.6, 5.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>65-69</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1,774</td>
<td>6.0</td>
<td>2.4, 15.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>70-74</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>861</td>
<td>7.0</td>
<td>2.1, 22.9</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥75</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>384</td>
<td>5.1</td>
<td>0.6, 40.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Smoking status (pack-years)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Never (referent)</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>21,974</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Former: &lt; 3.75</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>2,809</td>
<td>2.5</td>
<td>0.7, 8.6</td>
<td>&lt;0.01</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Former: 3.75-15</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1,448</td>
<td>3.6</td>
<td>1.1, 13.5</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Former: &gt;15</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>875</td>
<td>10.1</td>
<td>3.8, 27.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Current: &lt; 11.25</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1,428</td>
<td>2.0</td>
<td>0.3, 15.8</td>
<td>&lt;0.001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Current: 11.25-28.5</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1,110</td>
<td>7.6</td>
<td>2.3, 24.4</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Current: &gt;28.5</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>567</td>
<td>13.8</td>
<td>4.7, 40.4</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Sex</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Female</td>
<td>58</td>
<td>32,056</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>NAţ</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>217</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Race</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>White</td>
<td>60</td>
<td>30,776</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>NA</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Black/other</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>546</td>
<td>NA</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>State of residence</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Iowa</td>
<td>35</td>
<td>21,728</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>NA</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>North Carolina</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>10,545</td>
<td>0.5</td>
<td>0.2, 1.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Education (years)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;12 (referent)</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1,572</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.04</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>12</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>11,304</td>
<td>0.98</td>
<td>0.4, 2.7</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;12</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>15,209</td>
<td>0.4</td>
<td>0.1, 1.4</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


Table continues

cancer among spouses. Among both applicators and spouses,
we observed a reduced risk of lung cancer among those who
completed some college compared with those that did not
graduate from high school. A meaningful pattern of reduced
lung cancer risk with vegetable or fruit consumption was not
observed among pesticide applicators. Among spouses, a
nonsignificant reduction in risk was observed for fruit
consumption and vegetable consumption, and an unexpected
decrease in lung cancer risk was observed among those who
consumed at least four alcoholic beverages per month.
Consumption of alcoholic beverages did not appreciably
modify lung cancer risk among pesticide applicators.

Table 3 lists selected occupational exposures on and off
the farm that were evaluated. Only off-the-farm exposures to
asbestos (accounting for 16 exposed lung cancer cases) and
lead (accounting for seven exposed lung cancer cases) were
associated with an elevated lung cancer risk (asbestos:
adjusted odds ratio (OR) = 2.2, 95 percent CI: 1.3, 3.7; lead:
adjusted OR = 2.3, 95 percent CI: 1.1, 5.1) (data not shown).

None of the farm-related activities was associated with lung
cancer risk.

Table 4 displays odds ratios for applicators for the seven
pesticides for which lifetime exposure days showed some
evidence of an exposure-response relation. The following
four pesticides exhibited significant tests of trend with
increased lifetime days of use: metolachlor (chloracetanilide
herbicide), chlorpyrifos (phosphorothioate insecticide),
pendimethalin (dinitroaniline herbicide), and diazinon
(phosphorothioate insecticide). The following three pesti-
cides showed significant trends with increasing lifetime days
of use when the "low-exposure group" was used as a refer-
ence but not when the "no-exposure group" was the refer-
ence: dicamba (a benzoic acid herbicide), carbofuran (a
carbamate insecticide), and dieldrin (a chlorinated organic
insecticide, no longer registered for use in the United States).
Exposure-specific data for three of these seven chemicals
(dieldrin, diazinon, and pendimethalin) were available only
for those who completed the supplemental take-home ques-
tionnaire. No other significant exposure-response trends,

<!-- PageFooter="Am J Epidemiol 2004;160:876-885" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/160/9/876/86424 by Health & Welfare Canada user on 09 March 2026" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Pesticides and Lung Cancer Risk 881" -->


<table>
<caption>TABLE 2. Continued</caption>
<tr>
<th>Characteristic</th>
<th>No. of lung cancer cases*</th>
<th>No. of cohort members (noncases)*</th>
<th>Adjusted odds ratiot</th>
<th>95% confidence interval</th>
<th>Ptrend</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pneumonia</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No (referent)</td>
<td>46</td>
<td>27,094</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>NA</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>3,612</td>
<td>0.8</td>
<td>0.3, 2.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Bronchitis</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No (referent)</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>29,410</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>NA</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1,332</td>
<td>1.4</td>
<td>0.4, 5.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Asthma</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No (referent)</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>29,228</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>NA</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1,507</td>
<td>1.7</td>
<td>0.5, 6.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Family history of lung cancer</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td>49</td>
<td>28,023</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>NA</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>2,664</td>
<td>1.3</td>
<td>0.5, 3.5</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Vegetable intake (servings/week)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≤4 (referent)</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>4,022</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.09</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5-7</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>8,198</td>
<td>0.93</td>
<td>0.4, 2.2</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;7</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>11,058</td>
<td>0.6</td>
<td>0.2, 1.7</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fruit intake (servings/week)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≤2</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>4,151</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.09</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>3-6</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>6,497</td>
<td>0.90</td>
<td>0.4, 3.1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥7</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>12,689</td>
<td>0.6</td>
<td>0.2, 1.6</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Alcohol intake (servings/time period)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Never</td>
<td>36</td>
<td>14,030</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.05</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≤3/month</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>13,167</td>
<td>0.5</td>
<td>0.2, 1.2</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥4/month</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>3,732</td>
<td>0.2</td>
<td>0.04, 0.8</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>

\* Missing data for some questions are responsible for differences in total cell counts.

t Odds ratios adjusted for all the other variables listed in the table.

\# NA, not applicable.


either negative or positive, were observed among the other
43 pesticides evaluated in our analyses. For all 22 chemicals
listed in the enrollment questionnaire, results were similar
for those who did and did not complete the take-home ques-
tionnaire. There were insufficient numbers of spouses with
lung cancer who had been exposed to individual pesticides to
explore the risk related to direct exposure at this time.

Trends in lung cancer risk with exposure to any of these
pesticides did not differ significantly by histologic type
reported by either state cancer registry or by state of resi-
dence, but the number of exposed cases for any single histo-
logic type or state of residence was small and these analyses
will have to be repeated when additional cases are available.
Trends in lung cancer risk with exposure to these pesticides
were observed among both smokers and former smokers, but
there were too few never-smoker cases to analyze.

For the four pesticides consistently associated with lung
cancer risk among applicators in our analysis, intensity-
weighted days of pesticide exposure generally produced
lower estimates of lung cancer risk compared with lifetime

exposure days. Metolachlor and pendimethalin (for highest
vs. nonexposed groups: OR = 2.3, 95 percent CI: 0.9, 5.5,
Ptrend = 0.67; and OR = 4.4, 95 percent CI: 1.1, 17.6, Ptrend =
0.95, respectively) and chlorpyrifos and diazinon (for
highest vs. nonexposed groups: OR = 1.8, 95 percent CI:
1.0, 3.2, Ptrend = 0.04; and OR = 1.4, 95 percent CI: 0.6, 3.8,
Ptrend = 0.21, respectively) showed an increase in lung cancer
risk with increasing use of the pesticides, but the trend was
significant only for chlorpyrifos.


## DISCUSSION

Consistent with earlier reports (2), this report found that
private applicators, who are mainly farmers, experienced a
significantly lower risk of lung cancer compared with the
general population, likely due to lower smoking rates. We
also found that four heavily used agricultural pesticides,
including two herbicides (i.e., metolachlor and
pendimethalin) and two insecticides (i.e., chlorpyrifos and
diazinon), were associated with a significant excess lung

<!-- PageFooter="Am J Epidemiol 2004;160:876-885" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/160/9/876/86424 by Health & Welfare Canada user on 09 March 2026" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="882 Alavanja et al." -->


<table>
<caption>TABLE 3. Farm tasks (days of exposure in lifetime) and off- the-farm jobs (ever vs. never) evaluated for an association with lung cancer, Agricultural Health Study, 1993-2001</caption>
<tr>
<th>Farm tasks</th>
<th>Off-the-farm job exposures</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Till soil</td>
<td>Pesticides</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Drive combine-harvester</td>
<td>Solvents</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Plant</td>
<td>Gasoline</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Natural fertilizer (manure)</td>
<td>Asbestos</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Chemical fertilizer</td>
<td>X-rays</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Hand-pick crops</td>
<td>Grain dust</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Milk cows (summer)</td>
<td>Wood dust</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Milk cows (winter)</td>
<td>Cotton dust</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Drive truck (summer)</td>
<td>Mine dust</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Drive truck (winter)</td>
<td>Engine exhaust</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Drive diesel tractor (summer)</td>
<td>Solder</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Drive diesel tractor (winter)</td>
<td>Welding fumes</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Drive gas tractor (summer)</td>
<td>Electric-arc fumes</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Drive gas tractor (winter)</td>
<td>Lead</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Weld (summer)</td>
<td>Mercury</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Weld (winter)</td>
<td>Cadmium</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Repair engines (summer)</td>
<td>Other metals</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Repair engines (winter)</td>
<td>Drilling tools</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Grind metal (summer)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Grind metal (winter)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Grind animal feed (summer)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Grind animal feed (winter)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Clean with gasoline (summer)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Clean with gasoline (winter)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>


cancer risk in the Agricultural Health Study cohort. Three
other pesticides including dicamba, a herbicide, and two
insecticides, carbofuran and dieldrin, exhibited an increasing
lung cancer risk with increasing lifetime days of use when
the "low-exposure" group was used as the referent group but
not when the "nonexposed" group was used as the referent
group. These significant trends with lung cancer risk were
observed after controlling for cigarette smoking, age, and
other potential confounding risk factors. In addition, no
meaningful differences in our results were found between
the cohort members who completed the take-home question-
naire (i.e., 40 percent applicators) and those that did not,
consistent with earlier observations made on this cohort (28).
In a small nested case-control study of structural pesticide
applicators in Florida, diazinon and the class of organophos-
phate and carbamate insecticide showed an approximate
twofold excess lung cancer risk (9).

The four pesticides observed (i.e., metoachlor,
pendimethalin, chlorpyrifos, and diazinon) have a significant
exposure-response relation with lung cancer but did not have
as strong an exposure response when intensity-weighted
exposure days were used as an exposure metric. Since the
current intensity index developed for the Agricultural Health
Study gives particular weight to dermal exposure and not to

potentially more relevant respiratory exposure (27), lung
cancer risk estimates based on the intensity index may result
in increased random error. Further insight into this exposure
metric should be possible once field measures of pesticide
exposure associated with work practices become available
for the Agricultural Health Study cohort. Since we evaluated
50 pesticides and had no strong a priori hypotheses linking
specific pesticides with human lung cancer risk, we cannot
rule out the possibility that these are chance findings. We did
not make adjustments for multiple comparisons because the
appropriate methods are problematic when individual pesti-
cides-specific analyses are not independent, as in our data.

A total of 44,193 cohort members (more than 77 percent of
the cohort) were exposed to at least one of these seven pesti-
cides (i.e., chlorpyrifos, diazinon, pendimethalin, meto-
lachlor, dieldrin, dicamba, carbofuran), while a total of
approximately 29.1 percent were exposed to three or more of
these pesticides. These results suggest that a substantial
portion of farmers and commercial pesticides applicators
may be at an enhanced risk of lung cancer from working with
pesticides currently registered for use in the United States
and other countries.

Almost all the lung cancer cases that occurred in the Agri-
cultural Health Study cohort were observed in current or
former smokers. Although our findings remained after
taking into account lifetime smoking using several different
smoke exposure metrics, it is not possible to rule out residual
confounding from cigarette smoking. It is also not yet
possible to assess effect modification between pesticide
exposure and cigarette smoking.

We observed a lower lung cancer risk in the lowest expo-
sure days category for dicamba, metolachlor, pendimethalin,
carbofuran, chlorpyrifos, and diazinon compared with those
never exposed to these pesticides. Unidentified factors
present in the nonexposed group but not in the exposed
group might elevate risk among the nonexposed and be a
source of confounding. In other contexts, authors have
explained such an exposure-response curve as a result of
hormesis (29), that is, the protective effect resulting from
exposure to a subtoxic concentration of a chemical. While
we are inclined to believe uncontrolled confounding is the
most likely explanation for the shape of these exposure-
response curves, additional epidemiologic and mechanistic
data will be necessary before this question can be rigorously
addressed.

Patterns of odds ratios with pesticide exposures were
homogenous by histologic type of lung cancer. However, the
power of the statistical tests was low. Effect modification
with age or other occupational exposures was not observed.
A family history of lung cancer among first-degree relatives
conferred a small nonsignificant excess risk of lung cancer
among spouses, which is consistent with some other reports
(1, 30), but a family history effect was not observed among
pesticide applicators.

Table 5 summarizes laboratory results for mutagenicity or
carcinogenicity in animal bioassays of the seven chemicals
associated with an elevated lung cancer risk in the Agricul-
tural Health Study cohort (7). These data do not support our
epidemiologic finding linking pesticide exposure to lung
cancer risk. No evidence of animal carcinogenicity or

<!-- PageFooter="Am J Epidemiol 2004;160:876-885" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/160/9/876/86424 by Health & Welfare Canada user on 09 March 2026" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Pesticides and Lung Cancer Risk 883" -->


<table>
<caption>TABLE 4. Lung cancer risk among applicators by lifetime exposure days of indicated pesticide, using two referent groups, Agricultural Health Study, 1993-2001</caption>
<tr>
<th>Pesticide by lifetime exposure days</th>
<th>No. of exposed cases</th>
<th>Odds ratio*</th>
<th>95% confidence interval</th>
<th>Odds ratio*</th>
<th>95% confidence interval</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dicamba (herbicide; benzoic acid)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No exposure</td>
<td>95</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>Referent</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;24.5</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>0.7</td>
<td>0.4, 1.1</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>Referent</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>24.5-108.5</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>0.9</td>
<td>0.5, 1.4</td>
<td>1.3</td>
<td>0.7, 2.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>108.6-224.7</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>1.1</td>
<td>0.5, 2.3</td>
<td>1.7</td>
<td>0.7, 4.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;224.7</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>1.6</td>
<td>0.7, 3.4</td>
<td>3.1</td>
<td>1.2, 7.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ptrend</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.15</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.04</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Metolachlor (herbicide; chloracetanilide)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No exposure</td>
<td>96</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>Referent</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;38.8</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>0.6</td>
<td>0.4, 1.0</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>Referent</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>38.8-116</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>0.6, 1.6</td>
<td>1.6</td>
<td>0.8, 3.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>116.1-457.0</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.9</td>
<td>0.4, 1.8</td>
<td>1.2</td>
<td>0.5, 2.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;457.0</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>4.1</td>
<td>1.6, 10.4</td>
<td>5.0</td>
<td>1.7, 14.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ptrend</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.015</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.0002</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pendimethalin (herbicide; dinitroaniline)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No exposure</td>
<td>62</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>Referent</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;20.0</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>0.8</td>
<td>0.4, 1.4</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>Referent</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>24.5-56.0</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1.3</td>
<td>0.6, 2.5</td>
<td>1.6</td>
<td>0.7, 3.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>56.1-224.7</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1.6</td>
<td>0.6, 3.8</td>
<td>2.1</td>
<td>0.8, 6.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;224.7</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>3.5</td>
<td>1.1, 10.5</td>
<td>4.4</td>
<td>1.2, 15.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ptrend</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.005</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.003</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Carbofuran (insecticide; carbamate)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No exposure</td>
<td>110</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>Referent</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;24.5</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>0.7</td>
<td>0.5, 1.3</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>Referent</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>24.5-108.5</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.1</td>
<td>0.6, 2.0</td>
<td>1.4</td>
<td>0.7, 3.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;108.5</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.6</td>
<td>0.9, 3.2</td>
<td>2.3</td>
<td>1.0, 5.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ptrend</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.08</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.05</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Chlorpyrifos (insecticide; phosphorothioate)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No exposure</td>
<td>104</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>Referent</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;24.5</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>0.97</td>
<td>0.7, 1.4</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>Referent</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>24.5-103.0</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>0.6, 1.9</td>
<td>1.1</td>
<td>0.6, 2.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>103.1-116.0</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>1.7</td>
<td>0.9, 3.1</td>
<td>1.7</td>
<td>0.9, 3.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;116.0</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.7</td>
<td>0.9, 3.3</td>
<td>1.9</td>
<td>0.9, 4.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ptrend</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.02</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.03</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Diazinon (insecticide; phosphorothioate)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No exposure</td>
<td>65</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>Referent</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;20.0</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0.93</td>
<td>0.5, 1.8</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>Referent</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>20.0-108.5</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>1.4</td>
<td>0.7, 2.7</td>
<td>1.6</td>
<td>0.7, 3.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;108.5</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>2.7</td>
<td>1.2, 6.1</td>
<td>3.2</td>
<td>1.1, 8.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ptrend</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.008</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.04</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dieldrin (insecticide; chlorinated organic)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No exposure</td>
<td>80</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>Referent</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt;8.7</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>1.4</td>
<td>0.6, 3.6</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>Referent</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>8.7-50.7</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>2.2</td>
<td>0.7, 7.3</td>
<td>1.9</td>
<td>0.4, 8.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;50.7</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>5.3</td>
<td>1.5, 18.6</td>
<td>3.1</td>
<td>0.6, 16.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ptrend</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.0.005</td>
<td></td>
<td>0.27</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</table>

\* Odds ratios adjusted for smoking (pack-years among current and pack-years among former smokers), age, gender, and total
days of any pesticide application.


<!-- PageFooter="Am J Epidemiol 2004;160:876-885" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/160/9/876/86424 by Health & Welfare Canada user on 09 March 2026" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="884 Alavanja et al." -->


<table>
<caption>TABLE 5. Summary of the toxicity, mutagenicity, and animal carcinogenicity of selected pesticides, Agricultural Health Study, 1993- 2001</caption>
<tr>
<th>Pesticide</th>
<th>Use</th>
<th>Toxicity rating (EPA*,t)</th>
<th>Mutagenic?</th>
<th>Animal evidence for carcinogenicity</th>
<th>Carcinogenicity rating#</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Carbofuran</td>
<td>RUP*</td>
<td>I-II</td>
<td>Unlikely</td>
<td>No animal evidence</td>
<td>None</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Chlorpyrifos</td>
<td>GUP*</td>
<td>II</td>
<td>No</td>
<td>No evidence for carcinogenicity from studies of rats and mice</td>
<td>None</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Diazinon</td>
<td>RUP</td>
<td>II-III</td>
<td>Inconclusive</td>
<td>Improbable; no evidence for carcinogenicity from studies of rats</td>
<td>None</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dicamba</td>
<td>GUP</td>
<td>III</td>
<td>No</td>
<td>Improbable; no evidence for carcinogenicity from studies of rats</td>
<td>None</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dieldrin</td>
<td>Banned</td>
<td>Not listed</td>
<td>No</td>
<td>Shown to be hepatocarcinogenic in mice</td>
<td>EPA = class B2; IARC* = class 3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Metolachlor</td>
<td>GUP; some restricted</td>
<td>III</td>
<td>No</td>
<td>Unlikely; no evidence for carcinogenicity among male and female mice and among male rats; female rats given high doses for 2 years showed a significant increase in new growths, nodules, and lesions in livers at that dose</td>
<td>EPA = class C</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pendimethalin</td>
<td>GUP</td>
<td>III</td>
<td>No</td>
<td>No evidence of carcinogenicity from studies of mice</td>
<td>None</td>
</tr>
</table>

\* EPA, Environmental Protection Agency; RUP, restricted-use pesticides; GUP, general-use pesticides; IARC, International Agency for Research on Cancer.

t EPA toxicity rating: I, highly toxic; Il, moderately toxic; III, slightly toxic.

\# EPA carcinogenicity rating: class B2, probable human carcinogen; class C, possible human carcinogen. IARC carcinogenicity rating: class 1, human
carcinogen; class 2a, probable human carcinogen; class 2b, possible human carcinogen; class 3, not classifiable; class 4, probably not a human carcinogen.


mutagenicity is observed for six of the seven pesticides. A
hepatocarcinogen in mice, dieldrin (which the US Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency categorizes as a probable
human carcinogen) is now banned from the US market.
Metolachlor is associated with liver lesions in rats adminis-
tered high doses and is listed by the US Environmental
Protection Agency as a possible human carcinogen. Three
insecticides, that is, carbofuran, chlorpyrifos, and diazinon,
are considered highly toxic or moderately toxic, while the
herbicides are generally considered only slightly toxic.

Other factors that contribute to lung cancer risk in the US
population were shown to be significantly associated with
lung cancer within the Agricultural Health Study cohort,
including previous nonmalignant lung disease such as pneu-
monia and other chronic lung diseases (i.e., chronic bron-
chitis and emphysema), occupational exposure to asbestos
and lead, and socioeconomic status (i.e., years of education).
Dietary fruit and vegetable intake, alcohol consumption, and
leisure-time physical activity were observed to be somewhat
protective among spouses but not among the applicators in
this analysis. None of these potentially confounding factors
appeared to influence the observed associations between
specific pesticides and lung cancer risk.

We found no association between lung cancer in spouses
and direct use of any of the 50 pesticides. Currently, the
number of lung cancer cases among the spouses is relatively
small, limiting the interpretation of our data, and the analysis
will be repeated when a larger number of spousal cases is
available.

This study does have limitations. First, the exposure
weights used in our algorithm are based on a literature
review and not on direct measurements of exposure made
within the study cohort. These weighting factors heavily
emphasize dermal absorption over respiratory exposure,
which may be generally appropriate but may be less appro-

priate for a study of lung cancer etiology. An exposure-
monitoring effort within the study cohort is underway and
will help to refine our estimates of exposure in the future.
Second, some subjects in this study were asked to recall
pesticide use from years ago. For the oldest members of the
cohort, this was decades earlier. Although recall can be
faulty after many years, previous evaluation of this issue has
shown that recall of pesticide use by the Agricultural Health
Study cohort is comparable with the recall of other variables
such as diet and alcohol consumption, which have been used
by epidemiologists in other studies as standard exposure
measures (31). Third, follow-up of this cohort is relatively
short, and it is not possible to evaluate time-dependent expo-
sures and risk. Fourth, exposure-response analyses were
performed on 50 pesticides, increasing the possibility that
some or all of these findings could result from chance. Fifth,
our analysis focused its attention on the active ingredients of
formulated mixtures of commercial products used by private
and commercial applicators. These formulations contain
both active ingredients and so-called "inert ingredients," and
we cannot rule out the possibility that the formulated mixture
is responsible for the observed excess lung cancer risk.

The Agricultural Health Study has six principal strengths.
First, the data collection prior to the diagnosis of cancer
precludes the possibility of case-ascertainment bias. Second,
detailed information on exposure for each pesticide,
including years of use, applications per year, and applica-
tions in a lifetime, was used in the analysis. Third, ascertain-
ment and statistical adjustment for age, smoking history, and
other lung cancer risk factors mitigate the possibility of
uncontrolled confounding. Fourth, the size of the study gives
sufficient statistical power to examine the risk of exposure to
a number of specific chemical exposures. Fifth, the outcome
is cancer incidence obtained from population-based tumor
registries, which eliminates issues related to survival when

<!-- PageFooter="Am J Epidemiol 2004;160:876-885" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/160/9/876/86424 by Health & Welfare Canada user on 09 March 2026" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Pesticides and Lung Cancer Risk 885" -->

mortality data are the outcome. Sixth, ongoing follow-up of
the Agricultural Health Study cohort affords the opportunity
to repeat the analyses on new incident lung cancer cases
arising in the cohort.

In conclusion, at least four pesticides widely used
currently in the United States and elsewhere have been found
to be significantly associated with lung cancer risk. Inade-
quate control of the effect of smoking and less detailed pesti-
cide exposure information may have masked these effects in
earlier studies. Since we evaluated 50 pesticides with few a
priori hypotheses linking these pesticides with human lung
cancer risk, we cannot rule out the possibility that these are
chance findings. Replication of these results in other studies
and in continued follow-up in the Agricultural Health Study
will be necessary before any firm conclusions can be
reached.


## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Ruth Allen and Joy Pierce Herrington
for their invaluable technical assistance with the develop-
ment of this project.


## REFERENCES

1\. Williams MD, Sandler AB. The epidemiology of lung cancer.
Cancer Treat Res 2001;105:31-52.

2\. Blair A, Zahm SH. Cancer among farmers. Occup Med 1991;6:
335-54.

3\. International Agency for Research on Cancer. Supplement no.

7\. Overall evaluations of carcinogenicity: an updating of IARC
monographs volumes 1 to 42. Lyon, France: International
Agency for Research on Cancer, 1987.

4\. Luchtrath H. The consequences of chronic arsenic poisoning
among Moselle wine growers. Pathoanatomical investigations
of post-mortem examinations between 1960 and 1977. J Cancer
Res Clin Oncol 1983;105:173-82.

5\. Mabuchi K, Lilienfeld AM, Snell LM. Lung cancer among pes-
ticide workers exposed to inorganic arsenicals. Arch Environ
Health 1979;34:312-18.

6\. Mabuchi K, Lilienfeld AM, Snell LM. Cancer and occupational
exposure to arsenic: a study of pesticide workers. Prev Med
1980;9:51-77.

7\. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Pesticide Pro-
grams. List of chemicals evaluated for carcinogenic potential.
Washington, DC: Environmental Protection Agency, 2002.
(World Wide Web URL: www.epa.gov/pesticides/carlist/).

8\. Blair A, Grauman DJ, Lubin JH, et al. Lung cancer and other
causes of death among licensed pesticide applicators. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1983;71:31-7.

9\. Pesatori AC, Sontag JM, Lubin JH, et al. Cohort mortality and
nested case-control study of lung cancer among structural pest
control workers in Florida (United States). Cancer Causes Con-
trol 1994;5:310-18.

10\. Barthel E. Increased risk of lung cancer in pesticide-exposed
male agricultural workers. J Toxicol Environ Health 1981;8:
745-8.

11\. Becher H, Flesh-Janys D, Kauppinen T, et al. Cancer mortality
in German male workers exposed to phenoxy herbicides and

dioxins. Cancer Causes Control 1996;7:312-21.

12\. Kogevinas M, Becher H, Benn T, et al. Cancer mortality in
workers exposed to phenoxy herbicides, chlorophenols, and
dioxins: an expanded and updated international cohort study.
Am J Epidemiol 1997;145:1061-75.

13\. MacMahon B, Monson RR, Wang HH, et al. A second follow-
up of mortality in a cohort of pesticide applicators. J Occup
Med 1988;30:429-32.

14\. Wang HH, MacMahon RR. Mortality of pesticide applicators. J
Occup Med 1979;21:741-4.

15\. Bond GG, Wetterstroem NH, Roush GJ, et al. Cause specific
mortality among employees engaged in the manufacture, for-
mulation, or packaging of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid and
related salts. Br J Ind Med 1988;45:98-105.

16\. Coggon D, Pannett B, Winter PD, et al. Mortality of workers
exposed to 2 methyl-4 chlorophenoxyacetic acid. Scand J Work
Environ Health 1986;12:448-54.

17\. Ott MG, Olson RA, Cook RR, et al. Cohort mortality study of
chemical workers with potential exposure to the higher chlori-
nated dioxins. J Occup Med 1987;29:422-9.

18\. Nomura A, Stemmerman GN, Chyou PH, et al. Prospective
study of pulmonary function and lung cancer. Am Rev Respir
Dis 1991;144:307-11.

19\. Alavanja MCR, Brownson RC, Boice JD Jr, et al. Preexisting
lung disease and lung cancer among nonsmoking women. Am J
Epidemiol 1992;136:623-32.

20\. Wu AH, Fontham ETH, Reynolds P, et al. Family history of
cancer and the risk of lung cancer among lifetime nonsmoking
women in the United States. Am J Epidemiol 1996;43:535-42.

21\. Thune I, Lund E. The influence of physical activity in lung-
cancer risk: a prospective study of 81,516 men and women.
Int J Cancer 1997;70:57-62.

22\. Alavanja MCR, Lubin J, Mahaffey J, et al. Residential radon
exposure and the risk of lung cancer in Missouri. Am J Public
Health 1999;89:1042-8.

23\. Alavanja MCR, Field WR, Sinha R, et al. Lung cancer and red
meat consumption among Iowa women. Lung Cancer 2001;34:
37-46.

24\. Liddel FDK. Simple exact analysis of the standardized morality
ratio. J Epidemiol Community Health 1984;38:85-8.

25\. Monson RR. Occupational epidemiology. 2nd ed. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press, 1990:105-31.

26\. Breslow NE, Day NE. Statistical methods in cancer research.
Vol II. The design and analysis of cohort studies. Lyon, France:
International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1987:100-5.
(IARC scientific publication no. 82).

27\. Dosimeci M, Alavanja MCR, Rowland AS, et al. A quantitative
approach for estimating exposure to pesticides in the Agricul-
tural Health Study. Ann Occup Hyg 2002;46:245-60.

28\. Tarone R, Alavanja MCR, Zahm SH, et al. The Agricultural
Health Study: factors affecting completion and return of self-
administered questionnaires in a large prospective cohort study
of pesticide applicators. Am J Ind Med 1997;31:233-42.

29\. Calabrese EJ, Baldwin LA, Holland CD. Hormesis: a highly
generalizable and reproducible phenomenon with important
implications for risk assessment. Risk Anal 1999;19:261-81.

30\. Lichtensein P, Holm NV, Verkasalo PK, et al. Environmental
and heritable factors in the causation of cancer: analysis of
cohorts of twins from Sweden, Denmark, and Finland. N Engl J
Med 2000;343:78-85.

31\. Blair A, Tarone R, Sandler D, et al. Reliability of reporting on
lifestyle and agricultural factors by a sample of participants in
the Agricultural Health Study from Iowa. Epidemiology 2002;
13:94-9.

<!-- PageFooter="Am J Epidemiol 2004;160:876-885" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/160/9/876/86424 by Health & Welfare Canada user on 09 March 2026" -->
