<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->


<figure>

HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES - USA
\\\MENT OF HUMAIN

</figure>


<!-- PageHeader="HHS Public Access Author manuscript Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->

Published in final edited form as:
Reprod Toxicol. 2023 April ; 117: 108350. doi:10.1016/j.reprotox.2023.108350.


# Glyphosate exposure and preterm birth: a nested case-control pilot study

Meghana Vardeª, Roy R. Geronab, Roger B. Newmanc, Andrew Reckersb, David C. Braakd,e,
John E. Venad,", Michael S. Blooma,*

aDepartment of Global and Community Health, George Mason University, 4400 University Dr., MS
5B7, Fairfax, VA, 22030, USA;

bDepartment of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of California San
Francisco, 2340 Sutter St, S-232, San Francisco, CA, 94115, USA;

"Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of South Carolina, Rm 634,
Clinical Science Bldg., 96 Jonathan Lucas St., Charleston, SC, 29425, USA;

dDepartment of Public Health Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina, 135 Cannon St .;
MSC 835, Charleston, SC, 29455, USA;

eIntermountain Healthcare, Utah Valley Hospital, 1034 N 500 W., Provo, UT, 84604


## Abstract

Preterm birth (PTB) is associated with a high risk of infant mortality and long-term adverse health
effects. Glyphosate is a broad-spectrum herbicide applied in agricultural and non-agricultural
settings. Studies suggested an association between maternal exposure to glyphosate and PTB
among mostly racially homogenous populations, though results were inconsistent. The objective
of this pilot study was to inform the design of a larger and more definitive study of glyphosate
exposure and adverse birth outcomes in a racially-diverse population. Urine was obtained from
26 women with a PTB as cases and 26 women with a term birth as controls, from participants
enrolled in a birth cohort in Charleston, South Carolina. We used binomial logistic regression
to estimate associations between urinary glyphosate and the odds of PTB, and multinomial
regression to estimate associations between maternal racial identity and urinary glyphosate among
controls. Glyphosate was unrelated to PTB (odds ratio (OR) = 1.06, 95% CI: 0.61, 1.86).
Women who identified as Black had greater odds (OR = 3.83, 95% CI: 0.13, 111.33) of having
categorical "high" glyphosate (> 0.28 ng/ml) and lesser odds (OR = 0.79, 95% CI: 0.05, 12.21)
of "low" glyphosate (< 0.03 ng/ml) relative to women who identified as white, suggesting a

`Correspondence: Dr. Michael S. Bloom, Department of Global and Community Health, George Mason University, 4400 University
Dr., MS 5B7, Fairfax, VA, 22030, USA, mbloom22@gmu.edu, Dr. John E. Vena, Department of Public Health Sciences, Medical
University of South Carolina 135 Cannon St., MSC 835, Charleston, SC 29455, USA, vena@musc.edu.

Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review
of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered
which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

<!-- PageFooter="Declaration of interests" -->
<!-- PageFooter="The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 2" -->

potential racial disparity, although the effect estimates were imprecise and included the null. Given
concerns of potential reproductive toxicity of glyphosate, the results merit confirmation in a larger
investigation to determine specific sources of glyphosate exposure, incorporating longitudinal
urinary glyphosate measures during pregnancy and a comprehensive measure of diet.


## Keywords

Exposure; Glyphosate; Preterm Birth; Racial Disparity


## 1. Introduction

Preterm birth is associated with an increased risk of infant mortality and morbidity [1]. In
a multi-country analysis of nearly 2 million live births, infants born at less than 32 weeks
gestation were approximately 29 times more likely to die in the first 28 postnatal days than
infants born at term [2]. A U.S. study of almost 3.5 million births found that infants born
at 34-36 weeks gestation experienced significantly greater neonatal (3.7 to 9.5-fold) and
infant (2.6 to 5.4-fold) mortality risks compared to term births [3]. Infants born preterm
also experience greater risks for infections [4], sepsis, respiratory distress, intraventricular
hemorrhage, hypoglycemia, feeding difficulties, necrotizing enterocolitis, hypothermia, and
hyperbilirubinemia than their term counterparts [5]. Furthermore, preterm infants have
greater long-term risks for neurodevelopmental delays, hypertension, cardiovascular disease,
renal disease, and pulmonary impairment [6].

In addition to socioeconomic status and racial/ethnic identity [7], exposure to chemical
pollutants, including glyphosate, may be associated with an increased risk of preterm birth
[8]. Glyphosate is used to control broadleaf weeds and grasses and is the active ingredient
in several commercial and agricultural herbicides including Roundup® [9]. It is applied in
agricultural and non-agricultural settings and can be detected in the soil, air, and surface
and ground waters [10]. Glyphosate use grew dramatically over the past 40 years in the
U.S., from 635,000 kg used in 1974 to 125,384,000 kg used in 2014 [11], increasing the
likelihood of human exposure. Based primarily on in vitro studies, glyphosate has been
proposed to possess anti-estrogenic activity [12], raising concerns for potential human
reproductive toxicity [13]. Glyphosate inhibited cytochrome P450 aromatase activity in
human placental JEG3 and embryonic cell lines at levels lower than those recommended for
use in agriculture, and the effect was potentiated in the presence of adjuvants found in the
commercial Roundup® formulation [14,15].

In women with a pregnancy, glyphosate was detected in maternal and umbilical cord serum
[16] and urine [17], and glyphosate exposure may differ among women with different
racial identities. A 2003-2005 study conducted in an agricultural area of North Carolina
found that among women with a pregnancy, 59% of women who identified as white were
exposed to glyphosate applied to nearby crops compared to only 22% of women who
identified as Black [18]. However, median urinary glyphosate concentrations were modestly
greater among U.S. women 18-44 years of age who identified as non-Hispanic Black (0.47
ng/ml) in 2013-2014, compared to women who identified as non-Hispanic white (0.36

<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 3" -->

ng/ml) [19]. Diet is a common source of glyphosate exposure in the general population,
via ingestion of residues on fruits and vegetables [20] and in processed food obtained
from genetically modified organism (GMO) crops such as corn, wheat, and soybean [21].
Agricultural use is an important source of occupational glyphosate exposure, as farmers
had higher urinary glyphosate concentrations than their spouses, who had glyphosate levels
ranging from <1 part per billion (ppb) to 1 ppb [22]. Women residing in closer proximity
to glyphosate crop applications had greater urinary glyphosate concentrations than women
residing farther away [16], demonstrating that levels of glyphosate exposure may also vary
based on proximity to its agricultural use.

Observational studies have suggested associations between glyphosate exposure and preterm
birth among human populations, although the results have been inconsistent, and were
mostly limited to racially homogenous populations. Greater glyphosate exposure was
associated with an increased odds of preterm birth among women in Puerto Rico [23].
Greater prenatal glyphosate exposure was also correlated with shorter gestational length
among women in urban and rural areas of the U.S. [17,24]. However, studies of women from
agricultural regions of Missouri and California showed no association between glyphosate
exposure and preterm birth [25,26]. Still, U.S. study populations overwhelmingly comprised
women who identified racially as white, potentially limiting generalizability of the results to
a more diverse population including women of color, who experience an increased risk of
preterm birth [27,28]

To the best of our knowledge no studies published to date have investigated an association
between glyphosate exposure and preterm birth in a racially-diverse southeastern U.S.
study population. Therefore, the objectives of this hypothesis-generating pilot study were
to estimate the association between glyphosate exposure and preterm birth, and to estimate a
potential disparity in glyphosate exposure between women who identified as Black or white.
These results will help to inform the design of a larger and a more definitive future study of
race disparities of glyphosate exposure and adverse birth outcomes.


## 2. Materials and Methods


### 2.1 Study population

The women in this study were selected from participants in the larger Reproductive
Development Study, a prospective birth cohort study of n = 319 women with a pregnancy
and residing in the Charleston, South Carolina metropolitan area between 2011-2014
[29,30]. The current analysis includes women with a preterm birth (< 37 weeks gestation)
selected as cases (n = 26) and randomly selected women with a term birth (> 37
weeks gestation) as controls (n = 26), frequency matched to cases on racial identity
(self-identified). Eligible women were at least 18 years of age, had a fetal ultrasound
between 18-22 weeks gestation, had a singleton fetus, and planned to deliver at the Medical
University of South Carolina (MUSC). Women were excluded if they did not have a
first trimester ultrasound, had a fetus with anomalies or aneuploidy, used progesterone
or any other steroids, and had a known endocrine disorder. At the time of enrollment
(18-22 weeks gestation), women provided a urine specimen for analysis of environmental
chemicals, completed a study questionnaire to collect sociodemographic information, and

Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01.

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 4" -->

had height and weight measured to calculate body mass index (BMI, kg/m2). Women
provided information about their daily food and beverage consumption habits as part of the
study questionnaire, both "in general" and "since learning of pregnancy." Clinical data were
extracted from electronic medical records. All participants provided informed consent prior
to enrollment and the study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the
MUSC.


### 2.2 Glyphosate analysis

Urine samples were processed and stored at -70 ℃ until shipment to the University
of California at San Francisco Clinical Toxicology and Environmental Biomonitoring
Laboratory for glyphosate analysis early in 2020. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) with an Agilent LC 1260-AB Sciex 5500 Triple Quadrupole
mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, Inc., St. Clara, CA USA; AB Sciex LLC,
Framingham, MA USA) was employed to quantify urinary glyphosate using the standard
addition method [17]. The limits of detection (LOD) and quantification were 0.03 ng/mL.
In this analysis, we imputed values measured below the detection limit as LOD/1/2 [31].
Urinary specific gravity was measured using a handheld digital refractometer (Atago USA,
Inc., Bellevue, WA USA) prior to freezing. We corrected urinary glyphosate concentrations
for dilution using the formula, Gc= G((1.016-1)/(SG-1)), where G is the individual
glyphosate concentration (ng/mL), 1.016 is the average urine specific gravity for all women,
and SG is the individual sample specific gravity [32].


### 2.3 Confounding variables

Potential confounding factors, identified as previously reported predictors of glyphosate
exposure and preterm birth, were determined a priori based on the literature [33,34].
Potential confounding factors included maternal age at enrollment (years), maternal BMI
at enrollment (kg/m2) [35], self-identified maternal race (Black including African-American
or white) [28], maternal education as a dichotomous variable ("less than college" or
"college degree or more") [36,37], and season of specimen collection as a categorical
variable (fall, spring, summer, or winter). We incorporated the potential confounders into
a directed acyclic graph using DAGitty 3.0 software [38], which describes our proposed
causal framework as shown in Figure 1. We retained maternal race, education, age, BMI,
and season of urine collection for adjustment in regression models, based on the "back door
test" for confounding pathways [39].


### 2.4 Statistical analysis

First, we analyzed the distributions of all covariates, and conducted Student's t-tests,
chi-square tests, Fisher's exact tests, or Mann-Whitney U tests to examine differences
in covariate values between case women with preterm births and control women with
term births. Among control women with a term birth, we estimated pairwise spearman
correlations between the specific gravity corrected urinary glyphosate concentration and
each self-reported food and beverage consumption habit from the study questionnaire data.
We categorized urinary glyphosate concentration as "low" values below the detection limit

<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 5" -->

(<0.03 ng/ml), and as "medium"(0.03<x<0.28 ng/ml) and "high" (≥0.28 ng/ml)
values dichotomized at the median concentration of the detected values.

We used binomial logistic regression to estimate the association between uncorrected
urinary glyphosate concentration and the odds of preterm birth, adjusted for urinary
specific gravity as a covariate to accommodate urinary dilution [40], and self-identified
maternal race to accommodate the matching factor [41]. We repeated the binomial logistic
regression model, with additional adjustment for maternal education, age, BMI, and season
of urine specimen collection as confounding variables, using the Multiple Imputation
Chained Equation (MICE) package in R statistical software [42] to account for n = 4
women with missing covariates. We exponentiated the regression coefficients to express
the associations as odds ratios (OR) scaled to an interquartile range (IQR) difference
in measured urinary glyphosate, to accommodate the low exposure levels in our study
population. We also conducted an exploratory analysis of urinary glyphosate concentration
categories as the outcome predicted by maternal racial identity, adjusted for maternal age
and BMI using multinomial logistic regression with "medium" glyphosate exposure as
the reference category. We used Dfbetas to identify and examine influential observations.
Consistent with the hypothesis-generating nature of our study, statistical significance was
defined as p < 0.10 for a two-tailed hypothesis test. Data were analyzed using R software
(version 4.1.2, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).


## 3. Results


### 3.1 Demographic characteristics and urinary glyphosate concentrations

There were 26 case women with preterm births and 26 control women with term births as
shown in Table 1. The women with preterm births tended to be younger and have a greater
BMI at the time of enrollment than the women with term births, however the differences
were not statistically significant. For women with preterm births, 38.5% had a college
education level or higher compared to 57.7% of women with term births. During the winter
season 34.6% of urinary specimens were collected from preterm births compared to 19.2%
among term births. Most preterm infants were assigned male sex at birth (73.1%), whereas
most term infants were assigned female sex at birth (57.7%). There were 42.3% (n=22)
of urinary glyphosate values measured above the detection limit, of which 11 experienced
preterm birth and 11 delivered at term.

Figure 2 shows the distribution of specific gravity-corrected urinary glyphosate
concentrations among control women with term births and case women with preterm births.
There was a median difference of 0.01 ng/ml (p = 0.634) urinary glyphosate concentration
between women with a preterm birth and women with a term birth. Among women with
term births, those who identified as Black and white had similar median urinary glyphosate
concentrations (median difference = 0.01 ng/ml; p = 0.858). However, a disproportionate
number of women who identified as Black were categorized as "high" (19.2%) and "low"
(23.1%) urinary glyphosate concentrations relative to women who identified as white (3.8%
and 34.6%, respectively), using categorical glyphosate exposure (Figure 3).

<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 6" -->


### 3.2 Correlations between urinary glyphosate concentration and food and beverage consumption habits

Table 2 shows the associations between sociodemographic factors and self-reported
food and beverage consumption habits and specific gravity-corrected urinary glyphosate
concentrations, among control women with a term birth. Women who smoked cigarettes
(median difference = - 0.29, p = 0.962) and women with female fetuses (median difference =
-0.06, p = 0.011) tended to have lower urinary glyphosate concentrations than non-smokers
and women with male fetuses, respectively. There were also positive correlations, albeit non-
statistically significant, between urinary glyphosate concentrations and consuming organic,
eco-friendly, chemical-free, or environmentally-friendly food in general (r = 0.32, p =
0.135), consuming foods and beverages in plastics they thought were safe in general (r =
0.29, p = 0.176), consuming foods stored in a clear, unbreakable, plastic container in general
(r =0.30, p = 0.161), microwaving food in a plastic container in general (r = 0.25, p =
0.256), and consuming fresh fruits or vegetables since learning of pregnancy (r = 0.33, p =
0.131).

Supplemental Table 1 shows the frequency of self-reported food and beverage consumption
habit questionnaire responses according to case status. Among case women with
preterm births, 12 (46.2%) "never" consumed organic, eco-friendly, chemical-free, or
environmentally-friendly food, whereas 15 (57.7%) control women with term births
"always," "usually," or "sometimes" did. On a daily basis, 11 (42.3%) women with preterm
births drank water from a soft, crushable plastic bottle compared to six (23.1%) women
with term births. Similarly, 11 (42.3%) women with preterm births "always," "usually,"
or "sometimes" consumed organic, pesticide-free, and chemical-free food since learning of
pregnancy, whereas 15 (57.7%) women with term births did. Since learning of pregnancy,
20 (76.9%) women with preterm births "always" or "usually" consumed fresh fruits or
vegetables, compared to 18 (69.2%) women with term births who did.


### 3.3 Association between urinary glyphosate and preterm birth

Table 3 shows the estimated associations between urinary glyphosate concentrations and
preterm birth from binomial logistic regression models. Model 1 shows that an IQR
difference in urinary glyphosate concentration was associated with minimally greater odds
of preterm birth, (OR = 1.13, 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.72, 1.83), adjusted for
urinary specific gravity and maternal race, though the confidence interval included the null
hypothesis. However, the association was close to the null hypothesis (OR = 1.06; 95% CI:
0.61, 1.86) when additionally adjusted for confounding by maternal race, education, age,
BMI, and season of urine specimen collection in Model 2.


### 3.4 Associations between urinary glyphosate and maternal racial identity

Table 4 shows the estimated associations between maternal racial identity and categorized
urinary glyphosate concentration among 26 control women with a term birth, adjusted for
urinary specific gravity. Both the crude (Model 1) and adjusted (Model 2) results show that
women who identified as Black had a greater odds of "high" categorical urinary glyphosate.
Model 2 shows that women who identified as Black had a 3.83-fold greater odds (95% CI:
0.13, 111.33) of "high" categorical urinary glyphosate and a 0.79-fold lesser odds (95% CI:

<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 7" -->

0.05, 12.21) of "low" categorical urinary glyphosate compared to women who identified
as white, adjusted for maternal age and BMI. Still, the effect estimates were imprecise as
suggested by the large 95% confidence intervals, which included the null hypothesis of no
association. Therefore, this preliminary result requires confirmation in a larger investigation.


## 4. Discussion


### 4.1 Key findings

In this hypothesis-generating nested case-control study, we did not find evidence to suggest
an association between urinary glyphosate concentration and the odds of preterm birth.
However, urinary glyphosate levels were low among our study population relative to
previous studies and women in the general U.S. population. Among control women with
term births, there were positive correlations between fruit and vegetable consumption habits
and urinary glyphosate concentration. Thus, our results suggest a potential racial disparity
in glyphosate exposure among women who identified as Black compared to women who
identified as white, although the results are imprecise and require confirmation.


### 4.2 Glyphosate exposure

Urinary glyphosate levels in our study were lower than reported for the general U.S.
population [19]. U.S. women, 18-44 years of age, who self-identified as Black or white
race, had a median urinary glyphosate concentration of 0.40 ng/ml (95% CI: 0.36, 0.44)
in 2013-2014 [19], compared to a median urinary glyphosate of 0.02 ng/ml (95% CI:
0.02, 0.07) among control women with a term birth in our study population. This difference
may in part reflect our primarily urban study population recruited from the Charleston,
South Carolina Metropolitan Area, with a large proportion of values measured below the
detection limit, whereas women from rural areas, who tended to have greater glyphosate
exposure than women from urban areas [17], may be included in the U.S. data. Still, The
Infant Development and Environment Study (TIDES) also reported a greater median second
trimester specific gravity corrected urinary glyphosate concentration of 0.23 ng/ml among
n = 94 women with term births from San Francisco, California, Rochester, New York,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, and Seattle, Washington [24], than in our study. The Puerto Rico
Testsite for Exploring Contamination Threats (PROTECT) study reported a median of 0.52
ng/ml second trimester urinary glyphosate among n = 142 women with a term birth and
residing in the Northern Karst aquifer region of Puerto Rico [23]. The reasons for the
discrepancy in urinary glyphosate levels across studies are unclear, but may be related to our
limited sample comprised only of women with low risk pregnancies using prenatal care in
the Charleston, SC Metropolitan Area. Median urinary glyphosate levels were much higher,
however, in a study of n = 71 women with a pregnancy from Central Indiana, with greater
concentrations among women from rural areas (4.05 ng/ml) than among women from urban
(3.41 ng/ml) and suburban (3.05 ng/ml) areas [17].


### 4.3 Association between urinary glyphosate and preterm birth

Similar to previous epidemiologic studies in general U.S. populations, we found little
evidence of an association between urinary glyphosate concentration and preterm birth.
Silver et al. [23] reported an OR of 1.11 (95% CI: 0.71, 1.74) per IQR greater urinary

<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 8" -->

glyphosate concentration and preterm birth among 177 women (142 women with term
births and 35 women with preterm births) in the PROTECT study, adjusted for maternal
age, education, prepregnancy BMI, and smoking. Similarly, Lesseur et al. [24] found little
association between increased glyphosate exposure and gestational age at delivery (hazard
ratio = 1.08, 95% CI: 0.91, 1.29) for 163 women with a pregnancy as part of TIDES,
adjusted for maternal age, race/ethnicity, and education level. In contrast, at substantially
greater urinary glyphosate levels, Parvez et al. [17] reported a correlation between greater
urinary glyphosate and shorter gestational length at delivery (correlation = - 0.30, p = 0.01)
among 71 women from Central Indiana, adjusted for maternal age, BMI, tobacco use,
alcohol use, and trimester of pregnancy, although the effect size was very weak and within
the range of full-term delivery [43].

The results of epidemiologic studies of glyphosate exposure and preterm birth among
women residing in agricultural areas, where populations tend to experience greater levels
of glyphosate exposure than in non-agricultural areas, were also mixed. For example, the
South Carolina and Minnesota Farm Family Exposure Study reported urinary glyphosate
concentrations ranges from <1 ppb to 15 ppb pre-application to <1 ppb to 126 ppb
post-application among farmers using glyphosate to treat crops, and <1 ppb to 3 ppb
pre-application to <1 ppb to 1 ppb post-application among their spouses [22], demonstrating
greater glyphosate exposure among applicators compared to their spouses. There was no
association between the risk of preterm birth and county-level density of some glyphosate-
intensive crops, including corn (relative risk (RR) = 0.97, 95% CI: 0.94, 0.99), soybean
(RR = 1.00, 95% CI: 0.98, 1.01), and wheat (RR = 1.01, 95%CI: 0.96, 1.06), although
an increased risk for cotton (RR = 1.06, 95% CI: 1.03, 1.09) among 140,329 women with
live births in rural areas of Missouri, adjusted for individual and county-level factors [25].
However, among 444,135 women with live births in California between 1998 and 2010,
the odds of preterm birth were 1.04 (95%CI: 1.01, 1.07) times greater among women who
lived within 2 km of glyphosate compounds being applied to agricultural areas compared to
women residing farther away, adjusted for individual and neighborhood-level confounding
factors [26].


### 4.4 Correlations between individual maternal food and beverage consumption habits and urinary glyphosate concentration.

We found positive, albeit imprecise associations between specific food and beverage
consumption habits in general and since learning of pregnancy and urinary glyphosate
concentrations. Maximum glyphosate residue limits in the U.S. vary for fruits (0.1-0.5
mg/kg), vegetables (0.1-5 mg/kg), legumes and pulses (5-8 mg/kg), and grains, including
wheat (5-100 mg/kg) [44]. Although our study questionnaire did not refer to specific
foods consumed, we found that consumption of fresh and canned fruits and vegetables
since learning of pregnancy were correlated with greater urinary glyphosate concentrations,
thus glyphosate exposure may be related to dietary habits in this non-agricultural study
population. Given the recognized health benefits of fruit and vegetable consumption to
mother and fetus during pregnancy [45], and ongoing concerns about the potential adverse
health effects of exposure to glyphosate and other pesticides [46], these results merit a more
comprehensive investigation to identify specific fruits, vegetables, legumes, pulses (i.e.,

<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 9" -->

beans, lentils, or peas inside the pods), and grains that may contribute to greater glyphosate
exposure during pregnancy.


### 4.5 Associations between maternal racial identity and food and beverage consumption habits

In the current study, we found that a greater number of women who identified as Black were
in the "high" urinary glyphosate category than women who identified as white, and fewer
women who identified as Black were in the "low" urinary glyphosate category than women
who identified as white. The categorical differences in urinary glyphosate concentrations
were small and imprecise, so this result requires confirmation. Although our study did not
look at specific dietary practices by racial identity, previous studies have shown differences
in dietary habits among women with a pregnancy and different racial identities [47]. In
our previous work, women who identified as Black reported greater consumption of canned
fruits and vegetables since learning of pregnancy than women who identified as white [30].
In a study of 125 women with a pregnancy in North Carolina, women who identified as
African-American consumed fewer whole grains but more fruit than women who identified
as white, adjusted for age, education, planned or unplanned pregnancy, and marital status
[48]. A study of 1151 women with a pregnancy from Tennessee found that 1% of those
who identified as African-American had a diet consisting primarily of fruits and vegetables,
compared to 30.2% of women who identified as European-American [49]. A study looking
at dietary glyphosate exposure among different U.S. diet styles (i.e., healthy-U.S. style,
healthy Mediterranean style, and healthy vegetarian style) found higher levels of glyphosate
residues associated with specific foods, specifically legumes and grains, but not associated
with a specific U.S. dietary style [50]. Differences in glyphosate residue on specific foods
may be due to differences in the treatment of the product prior to consumption (e.g., washing
and drying) [51]. These studies suggest that differences in consumption of glyphosate-
intensive produce may contribute in part to the racial disparity in urinary glyphosate that we
found, although we were unable to investigate the hypothesis in this pilot study. A future
study with a comprehensive dietary assessment, including differentiating foods with and
without GMOs, in a racially-diverse population of women with a pregnancy is necessary.


### 4.6 Study strengths and limitations

There were several important strengths to this hypothesis-generating study. We used a nested
case-control design to estimate associations between urinary glyphosate in preterm birth
cases and term birth controls selected from our larger birth cohort, ensuring that the controls
were representative of the source population for cases and minimizing the likelihood of a
selection bias. Our study population was also racially diverse, comprised equally of women
who identified as Black and women who identified as white, allowing us to generate a
preliminary estimate of the potential race disparity in glyphosate exposure. We employed
clinically validated birth outcomes collected from electronic medical records, with dating of
gestational age using first trimester ultrasound, minimizing outcome misclassification. Also,
we employed a urinary biomarker to estimate glyphosate exposure during pregnancy, which
incorporates toxicokinetic processes that are not captured by indirect exposure assessment
strategies, such as using exposure questionnaires or residential proximity measures.

<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 10" -->

However, the pilot nature of our study also presents limitations. First, we had a small
sample size. Therefore, we had limited power to detect modest associations and we were
unable to conduct a stratified analysis according to maternal-racial identity. Also, we only
had a single urinary biomarker of exposure to measure glyphosate, which has a half-life
measured in hours [52], and thus may have misclassified exposure among some women. The
reported intraclass correlation coefficient, which describes the expected correlation between
two urinary glyphosate measures from the same woman, was only 0.24 (95% CI: 0.10,
0.46) in two urine specimens collected over eight weeks from women with a pregnancy in
the PROTECT study [23]. These results demonstrate the low reliability of using a single
urinary glyphosate sample to estimate gestational glyphosate exposure. However, urine
specimens were collected from all women between 18-22 weeks gestation in the current
study and so we anticipate a bias towards the null hypothesis (i.e., non-differential exposure
measurement error between preterm birth cases and term birth controls). A future study with
longitudinal urine specimen collections during pregnancy in a racially-diverse population
will be necessary for more definitive results. Our study also did not measure urinary
aminomethylphosphonic acid (AMPA), the primary environmental degradation product of
glyphosate, which has also been shown to be associated with gestational age at delivery
[23,24], and may have underestimated the overall glyphosate exposure. A future study
should measure both urinary glyphosate and AMPA. There were a large proportion of
glyphosate values measured below the detection limit in our study, although our detection
limit was lower than in previous reports [23,24]. Therefore, these results may not be
generalizable to populations with greater glyphosate exposures. Due to the small sample
size, we also did not distinguish late (34-36 weeks) from early (< 34 weeks gestation)
preterm birth, which may have different etiologies [53] and undermined our ability to
detect an association with urinary glyphosate. Finally, these are preliminary data and suffer
from limitations of a pilot study, however we are hopeful the results might warrant further
investigation.


## 5. Conclusions

Overall, the results of this hypothesis-generating pilot study suggest that maternal urinary
glyphosate concentration was not associated with preterm birth in a racially-diverse
southeastern U.S. study population with low levels of urinary glyphosate. Our results also
suggest that consumption of fruits and vegetable may contribute to glyphosate exposure
among women with a pregnancy, and importantly that women who identified as Black
may have experienced greater glyphosate exposure than women who identified as white.
However, given our small sample size, low urinary glyphosate levels, and limited data
collection, these results are preliminary and require confirmation. These results can be used
to inform a larger study, incorporating longitudinal urinary glyphosate measures during
pregnancy, a comprehensive dietary measure, and assessing sources of glyphosate other than
dietary routes among racially-diverse populations.


### Supplementary Material

Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01.

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 11" -->


## Acknowledgements:

We would like to thank Betty Oswald, Jesslyn Payne, and the MUSC obstetrics research team for collecting and
organizing samples and clinical data. We graciously thank cohort participants for their collaboration. Lastly, we
honor the late Louis J. Guillette, Jr., without whom this study would not have been possible.

Roger B. Newman reports financial support was provided by Spaulding-Paolozzi Foundation.

Funding:

The Spaulding-Paolozzi Foundation and the Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology Women's Health Research
Division and Department of Public Health Sciences at the Medical University of South Carolina supported this
study.

This work was also supported in part by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences of the National
Institutes of Health under Award Number R21ES031231. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.


## References

[1]. Shapiro-Mendoza CK, Lackritz EM, Epidemiology of late and moderate preterm birth, Semin.
Fetal. Neonatal. Med 17 (2012) 120-125. 10.1016/j.siny.2012.01.007 [PubMed: 22264582]

[2]. Katz J, Lee AC, Kozuki N, Lawn JE, Cousens S, Blencowe H, Ezzati M, Bhutta ZA, Marchant
T, Willey BA, Adair L, Barros F, Baqui AH, Christian P, Fawzi W, Gonzalez R, Humphrey J,
Huybregts L, Kolsteren P, Mongkolchati A, Mullany LC, Ndyomugyenyi R, Nien JK, Osrin D,
Roberfroid D, Sania A, Schmiegelow C, Silveira MF, Tielsch J, Vaidya A, Velaphi SC, Victora
CG, Watson-Jones D, Black RE, Mortality risk in preterm and small-for-gestational-age infants
in low-income and middle-income countries: a pooled country analysis, Lancet. 382 (2013) 417-
425. 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60993-9. [PubMed: 23746775]

[3]. Reddy UM, Ko C-W, Raju TNK, Willinger M, Delivery indications at late-preterm gestations
and infant mortality rates in the United States, Pediatrics. 124 (2009) 234-240. 10.1542/
peds.2008-3232. [PubMed: 19564305]

[4]. Adams-Chapman I, Stoll BJ, Neonatal infection and long-term neurodevelopmental outcome in
the preterm infant, Curr. Opin. Infect. Dis 19 (2006) 290. 10.1097/01.qco.0000224825.57976.87.
[PubMed: 16645492]

[5]. Purisch SE, Gyamfi-Bannerman C, Epidemiology of preterm birth, Semin. Perinatol. 41 (2017)
387-391. 10.1053/j.semperi.2017.07.009.

[6]. Luu TM, Rehman Mian MO, Nuyt AM, Long-term impact of preterm birth, Clin. Perinatol 44
(2017) 305-314. 10.1016/j.clp.2017.01.003. [PubMed: 28477662]

[7]. Muglia LJ, Katz M, The enigma of spontaneous preterm birth, N. Engl. J. of Med 362 (2010)
529-535. [PubMed: 20147718]

[8]. Wu Y, Wang J, Wei Y, Chen J, Kang L, Long C, Wu S, Shen L, Wei G, 2022. Maternal exposure
to endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) and preterm birth: A systematic review, meta-analysis,
and meta-regression analysis, Environ. Pollut 292, 118264. 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.118264.
[PubMed: 34606968]

[9]. US EPA, Glyphosate, (2014). https://www.epa.gov/ingredients-used-pesticide-products/glyphosate
(accessed August 9, 2022).

[10]. Mendez F, Ordoñez-Betancourth J, Abrahams N, Effects of glyphosate exposure on reproductive
health: A systematic review of human, animal and in-vitro studies, Expo. Health 14 (2022) 635-
669. 10.1007/s12403-021-00442-4.

[11]. Benbrook CM, 2016. Trends in glyphosate herbicide use in the United States and globally,
Environ. Sci. Eur 28, 3. 10.1186/s12302-016-0070-0. [PubMed: 27752438]

[12]. Muñoz JP, Bleak TC, Calaf GM, 2021. Glyphosate and the key characteristics of an endocrine
disruptor: A review, Chemosphere. 270, 128619. 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.128619. [PubMed:
33131751]

<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 12" -->

[13]. Gerona RR, Reiter JL, Zakharevich I, Proctor C, Ying J, Mesnage R, Antoniou M,
Winchester PD, 2022. Glyphosate exposure in early pregnancy and reduced fetal growth:
a prospective observational study of high-risk pregnancies, Environ. Health 21, 95. 10.1186/
s12940-022-00906-3. [PubMed: 36221133]

[14]. Benachour N, Sipahutar H, Moslemi S, Gasnier C, Travert C, Séralini GE, Time- and Dose-
Dependent Effects of Roundup on Human Embryonic and Placental Cells, Arch. Environ.
Contam. Toxicol 53 (2007) 126-133. 10.1007/s00244-006-0154-8. [PubMed: 17486286]

[15]. Richard S, Moslemi S, Sipahutar H, Benachour N, Seralini G-E, Differential effects of glyphosate
and Roundup on human placental cells and aromatase, Environ. Health. Perspect 113 (2005)
716-720. 10.1289/ehp.7728. [PubMed: 15929894]

[16]. Kongtip P, Nankongnab N, Phupancharoensuk R, Palarach C, Sujirarat D, Sangprasert S,
Sermsuk M, Sawattrakool N, Woskie SR, Glyphosate and paraquat in maternal and fetal
serums in Thai women, J. Agromedicine 22 (2017) 282-289. 10.1080/1059924X.2017.1319315.
[PubMed: 28422580]

[17]. Parvez S, Gerona RR, Proctor C, Friesen M, Ashby JL, Reiter JL, Lui Z, Winchester PD, 2018.
Glyphosate exposure in pregnancy and shortened gestational length: a prospective Indiana birth
cohort study, Environ. Health 17, 23. 10.1186/s12940-018-0367-0“ 10.1186/s12940-018-0367-0.
[PubMed: 29519238]

[18]. Rappazzo KM, Warren JL, Davalos AD, Meyer RE, Sanders AP, Brownstein NC, Luben TJ,
Maternal residential exposure to specific agricultural pesticide active ingredients and birth defects
in a 2003-2005 North Carolina birth cohort, Birth. Defects. Res 111 (2019) 312-323. 10.1002/
bdr2.1448. [dataset] [PubMed: 30592382]

[19]. NHANES Questionnaires, Datasets, and Related Documentation, (n.d.). https://wwwn.cdc.gov/
nchs/nhanes/Default.aspx (accessed October 11, 2022).

[20]. Vicini JL, Jensen PK, Young BM, Swarthout JT, Residues of glyphosate in food and dietary
exposure, Compr. Rev. Food. Sci. Food. Saf 20 (2021) 5226-5257. 10.1111/1541-4337.12822.
[PubMed: 34397175]

[21]. USDA ERS, Recent Trends in GE Adoption, (n.d.). https://www.ers.usda.gov/
data-products/adoption-of-genetically-engineered-crops-in-the-u-s/recent-trends-in-ge-adoption/
(accessed November 14, 2022).

[22]. Acquavella JF, Alexander BH, Mandel JS, Gustin C, Baker B, Chapman P, Bleeke M, Glyphosate
biomonitoring for farmers and their families: results from the Farm Family Exposure Study.,
Environ. Health. Perspect 112 (2004) 321-326. 10.1289/ehp.6667. [PubMed: 14998747]

[23]. Silver MK, Fernandez J, Tang J, McDade A, Sabino J, Rosario Z, Vélez VCV, Alshawabkeh A,
Cordero JF, Meeker JD, 2021. Prenatal exposure to glyphosate and its environmental degradate,
aminomethylphosphonic acid (AMPA), and preterm birth: A nested case-control study in the
PROTECT cohort (Puerto Rico), Environ. Health. Perspect 129, 057011. 10.1289/EHP7295.
[PubMed: 34009015]

[24]. Lesseur C, Pathak KV, Pirrotte P, Martinez MN, Ferguson KK, Barrett ES, Nguyen RHN,
Sathyanarayana S, Mandrioli D, Swan SH, Chen J, 2022. Urinary glyphosate concentration
in pregnant women in relation to length of gestation, Environ. Res 203, 111811. 10.1016/
j.envres.2021.111811. [PubMed: 34339697]

[25]. Almberg KS, Turyk M, Jones RM, Anderson R, Graber J, Banda E, Waller LA, Gibson R,
Stayner LT, A study of adverse birth outcomes and agricultural land use practices in Missouri,
Environ. Res 134 (2014) 420-426. 10.1016/j.envres.2014.06.016. [PubMed: 25261770]

[26]. Ling C, Liew Z, Von Ehrenstein OS, Heck JE, Park AS, Cui X, Cockburn M, Wu J, Ritz B,
2018. Prenatal exposure to ambient pesticides and preterm birth and term low birthweight in
agricultural regions of California, Toxics. 6, 41. 10.3390/toxics6030041. [PubMed: 30037110]

[27]. Braveman P, 2021. Explaining the Black-white disparity in preterm birth: A consensus statement
from a multi-disciplinary scientific work group convened by the March of Dimes, Front. Reprod.
Health 3, 24. 10.3389/frph.2021.684207.

[28]. Burris HH, Lorch SA, Kirpalani H, Pursley DM, Elovitz MA, Clougherty JE, Racial disparities
in preterm birth in USA: A biosensor of physical and social environmental exposures, Arch. Dis.
Child 104 (2019) 931-935. 10.1136/archdischild-2018-316486. [PubMed: 30850379]

Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01.

<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 13" -->

[29]. Bloom MS, Wenzel AG, Brock JW, Kucklick JR, Wineland RJ, Cruze L, Unal ER, Yucel RM,
Jiyessova A, Newman RB, Racial disparity in maternal phthalates exposure; Association with
racial disparity in fetal growth and birth outcomes, Environ. Int 127 (2019) 473-486. 10.1016/
j.envint.2019.04.005. [PubMed: 30981018]

[30]. Sterrett ME, Bloom MS, Jamro EL, Wenzel AG, Wineland RJ, Unal ER, Brock J, Kucklick
J, Garcia K, Newman RB, 2021. Maternal food and beverage consumption behaviors and
discrepant phthalate exposure by race, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public. Health 18, 2190. 10.3390/
ijerph18042190. [PubMed: 33672279]

[31]. Hornung RW, Reed LD, Estimation of average concentration in the presence of nondetectable
values, Appl. Occup. Environ. Hyg 5 (1990) 46-51. 10.1080/1047322X.1990.10389587.

[32]. Boeniger MF, Lowry LK, Rosenberg J, Interpretation of urine results used to assess chemical
exposure with emphasis on creatinine adjustments: A review, Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc. J 54 (1993)
615-627. [PubMed: 8237794]

[33]. Gillezeau C, van Gerwen M, Shaffer RM, Rana I, Zhang L, Sheppard L, Taioli E, 2019.
The evidence of human exposure to glyphosate: a review, Environ. Health 18, 2. 10.1186/
s12940-018-0435-5. [PubMed: 30612564]

[34]. Stewart A, Graham E, Preterm birth: An overview of risk factors and obstetrical management,
Dev. Disabil. Res. Rev 16 (2010) 285-288. 10.1002/ddrr.124. [PubMed: 25708070]

[35]. Zhong Y, Cahill A, Macones G, Zhu F, Odibo A, The association between prepregnancy
maternal body mass index and preterm delivery, Amer. J. Perinatol 27 (2010) 293-298. 10.1055/
s-0029-1241736. [PubMed: 19823961]

[36]. El-Sayed AM, Galea S, Temporal changes in socioeconomic influences on health: Maternal
education and preterm birth, Am. J. Public. Health 102 (2012) 1715-1721. 10.2105/
AJPH.2011.300564. [PubMed: 22742063]

[37]. Luo Z-C, Wilkins R, Kramer MS, Effect of neighbourhood income and maternal education on
birth outcomes: a population-based study, CMAJ. 174 (2006) 1415-1420. 10.1503/cmaj.051096.
[PubMed: 16682708]

[38]. Textor J, Hardt J, Knüppel S, DAGitty: A graphical tool for analyzing causal diagrams,
Epidemiol. 22 (2011) 745. 10.1097/EDE.0b013e318225c2be.

[39]. Greenland S, Pearl J, Robins JM, Causal diagrams for epidemiologic research, Epidemiol. 10
(1999) 37-48.

[40]. Kuiper JR, O'Brien KM, Ferguson KK, Buckley JP, 2021. Urinary specific gravity measures
in the U.S. population: Implications for the adjustment of non-persistent chemical urinary
biomarker data, Environ. Int 156, 106656. 10.1016/j.envint.2021.106656. [PubMed: 34062395]

[41]. Bloom MS, Schisterman EF, Hediger ML, The use and misuse of matching in case-control
studies: the example of polycystic ovary syndrome, Fertil. Steril 88 (2007) 707-710. 10.1016/
j.fertnstert.2006.11.125. [PubMed: 17433314]

[42]. Zhang Z, 2016. Multiple imputation with multivariate imputation by chained equation (MICE)
package, Ann. of Transl. Med 4, 5. 10.3978/j.issn.2305-5839.2015.12.63 [PubMed: 26855941]

[43]. Jukic AM, Baird DD, Weinberg CR, McConnaughey DR, Wilcox AJ, Length of human
pregnancy and contributors to its natural variation, Hum. Reprod 28 (2013) 2848-2855. 10.1093/
humrep/det297. [PubMed: 23922246]

[44]. Maximum Residue Limits (MRL) Database, USDA Foreign Agricultural Service. (n.d.). https://
www.fas.usda.gov/maximum-residue-limits-mrl-database (accessed October 18, 2022).

[45]. Gete DG, Waller M, Mishra GD, Effects of maternal diets on preterm birth and low birth weight:
a systematic review, Br. J. Nutr 123 (2020) 446-461. 10.1017/S0007114519002897. [PubMed:
31711550]

[46]. Landrigan PJ, Pesticides and human reproduction, JAMA. Intern. Med 178 (2018) 26-27.
10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.5092. [PubMed: 29084335]

[47]. Siega-Riz AM, Bodnar LM, Savitz DA, What are pregnant women eating? Nutrient and
food group differences by race, Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol 186 (2002) 480-486. 10.1067/
mob.2002.121078. [PubMed: 11904611]

<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 14" -->

[48]. Hill AM, Nunnery DL, Ammerman A, Dharod JM, Racial/ethnic differences in diet quality and
eating habits among WIC pregnant women: Implications for policy and practice, Am. J. Health.
Promot 34 (2020) 169-176. 10.1177/0890117119883584. [PubMed: 31658816]

[49]. Colón-Ramos U, Racette S, Ganiban J, Nguyen T, Kocak M, Carroll K, Völgyi E, Tylavsky F,
Association between dietary patterns during pregnancy and birth size measures in a diverse
population in southern US, Nutrients. 7 (2015) 1318-1332. 10.3390/nu7021318. [PubMed:
25690420]

[50]. Louie F, Jacobs NFB, Yang LGL, Park C, Monnot AD, Bandara SB, 2021. A comparative
evaluation of dietary exposure to glyphosate resulting from recommended U.S. diets, Food.
Chem. Toxicol 158, 112670. 10.1016/j.fct.2021.112670. [PubMed: 34774925]

[51]. Kolakowski BM, Miller L, Murray A, Leclair A, Bietlot H, van de Riet JM, Analysis of
glyphosate residues in foods from the Canadian retail markets between 2015 and 2017, J. gric.
Food. Chem 68 (2020) 5201-5211. 10.1021/acs.jafc.9b07819.

[52]. Connolly A, Jones K, Basinas I, Galea KS, Kenny L, McGowan P, Coggins MA, Exploring the
half-life of glyphosate in human urine samples, Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 222 (2019) 205-210.
10.1016/j.ijheh.2018.09.004. [PubMed: 30293930]

[53]. Frey HA, Klebanoff MA. The epidemiology, etiology, and costs of preterm birth. Sem. Fetal.
Neonatal. Med 21 (2016) 68-73. 10.1016/j.siny.2015.12.011

<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 15" -->


## Highlights

· Preterm birth is associated with infant mortality and adverse health effects

· Glyphosate exposure has been suggested to be associated with preterm birth

· Black women had greater urinary glyphosate levels than white women during
pregnancy

· No association between urinary glyphosate concentration and preterm birth

<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 16" -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Figure 1. Directed acyclic graph showing hypothesized causal pathways between urinary glyphosate and preterm birth.</figcaption>

Maternal Age

Race/Ethnicity

Maternal BMI

Type of Home

Smoking Status

Maternal Education

Season of Collection

I

Glyphosate

Preterm Birth

</figure>


<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 17" -->


<figure>
<figcaption>Figure 2. Boxplots of the distributions of specific gravity-corrected urinary glyphosate concentration between case women with a preterm birth (n = 26) and control women with a term birth (n = 26) from Charleston, South Carolina.</figcaption>

Specific Gravity Corrected Urinary Glyphosate Concentration (ng/ml)

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

X
☒

X
☒

0.00

Preterm Births

Term Births

</figure>


<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 18" -->

Race

☒
Black (n=13)

☒
White (n=13)


<figure>
<figcaption>Figure 3. Categories of urinary glyphosate concentrations among control women with a term birth, by self-identified maternal race (n = 26) from Charleston, South Carolina.</figcaption>

30% -

Proportion of women

20%

10%

0% -

1

Low
<0.03

Medium
0.03<x<0.28

High
≥ 0.28

Glyphosate categories (ng/ml)

</figure>


<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 19" -->

Table 1.
Demographic characteristics of women with a pregnancy from Charleston, South Carolina, among case
women with preterm births and control women with term births.


<table>
<tr>
<th>Covariate</th>
<th>Preterm births (n = 26)</th>
<th>Term births (n = 26)</th>
<th>p-value</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Age, years (mean ± SD)</td>
<td>27.4 ±4.9</td>
<td>28.9 ± 5.8</td>
<td>0.333ª</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>BMI, kg/m2, (mean ± SD)</td>
<td>30.1 ±7.9</td>
<td>27.0±6.1</td>
<td>0.129ª</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Race, n (%)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>1.000 b</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>White</td>
<td>13 (50.0)</td>
<td>13 (50.0)</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Black</td>
<td>13 (50.0)</td>
<td>13 (50.0)</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Education, n (%)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.145b</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&lt; College</td>
<td>15 (57.7)</td>
<td>8 (30.8)</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt; College</td>
<td>10 (38.5)</td>
<td>15 (57.7)</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Missing</td>
<td>1 (3.8)</td>
<td>3 (11.5)</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Season of collection, n (%)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.613 b</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Spring</td>
<td>5 (19.2)</td>
<td>7 (26.9)</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Summer</td>
<td>7 (26.9)</td>
<td>7 (26.9)</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fall</td>
<td>5 (19.2)</td>
<td>7 (26.9)</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Winter</td>
<td>9 (34.6)</td>
<td>5 (19.2)</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Smoking status, n (%)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>1.000€</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Never smoked</td>
<td>25 (96.2)</td>
<td>24 (92.3)</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Current smoker d</td>
<td>1 (3.8)</td>
<td>2 (7.7)</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Infant sex, n (%)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>0.049b</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Male</td>
<td>19 (73.1)</td>
<td>11 (42.3)</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Female</td>
<td>7 (26.9)</td>
<td>15 (57.7)</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Specific gravity corrected urinary glyphosate concentration, ng/ml (median ± IQR)</td>
<td>0.06 ± 0.35</td>
<td>0.05 ±0.15</td>
<td>0.634€</td>
</tr>
</table>

NOTE:

a

'Student's t-test;

b
Chi-Square test of independence;

c

Fisher's exact test;

d
current smoker or quit since learning of pregnancy;

Mann Whitney U test

Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; IQR, interquartile range; SD, standard deviation


<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 20" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 2. Spearman correlation coefficients and differences of medians for sociodemographic factors and food and beverage consumption habits with specific gravity corrected urinary glyphosate concentrations, among control women with a term birth from Charleston, South Carolina (n = 26).</caption>
<tr>
<th>Covariate/Exposure</th>
<th>Correlation Coefficient or Difference of Medians</th>
<th>p-value</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Age</td>
<td>-0.05</td>
<td>0.800</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>BMI</td>
<td>-0.11</td>
<td>0.579</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Education" a</td>
<td>0.02b b</td>
<td>0.539</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Season of urine specimen collection c</td>
<td>-0.02b</td>
<td>0.569</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Smoking status d</td>
<td>-0.29b</td>
<td>0.962</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Infant sex e</td>
<td>-0.06b</td>
<td>0.011</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Food and Beverage Consumption Habits</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>"In general, how often did you ... ":</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Consume organic, eco-friendly, chemical-free, or environmentally-friendly food</td>
<td>0.32</td>
<td>0.135</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Food and beverages in safe plastics</td>
<td>0.29</td>
<td>0.176</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Drink water from a soft, crushable plastic bottle</td>
<td>-0.06</td>
<td>0.788</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Drink water from a hard, reusable plastic bottle</td>
<td>0.11</td>
<td>0.630</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Consume foods stored in a clear, unbreakable, plastic</td>
<td>0.30</td>
<td>0161</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>container</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Microwave food in a plastic container</td>
<td>0.25</td>
<td>0.256</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Caffeinate coffee in the past week?</td>
<td>-0.02b</td>
<td>0.911</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Caffeinate tea in the past week?</td>
<td>-0.02b</td>
<td>0.423</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Caffeinate soft drinks or sodas in the past week?</td>
<td>-0.01b</td>
<td>0.598</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>"Since learning of pregnancy, how often did you ... ":</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Consume organic, pesticide-free, chemical-free food</td>
<td>0.13</td>
<td>0.555</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Consume food grown by family/friends</td>
<td>0.10</td>
<td>0.649</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Consume unprocessed food</td>
<td>0.11</td>
<td>0.608</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Consume canned fruits or vegetables</td>
<td>0.23</td>
<td>0.281</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Consume frozen fruits or vegetables</td>
<td>0.03</td>
<td>0.909</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Consume fresh fruits or vegetables</td>
<td>0.33</td>
<td>0.131</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In a typical week consume food from a can</td>
<td>0.18</td>
<td>0.420</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In a typical week drink from a can</td>
<td>0.12</td>
<td>0.600</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In a typical week drink from a plastic bottle</td>
<td>0.24</td>
<td>0.270</td>
</tr>
</table>

NOTE:

a

Education (< college / > college);

b
difference of medians;

difference of medians between winter and spring;

d
smoking status (never smoked / current smoker or quit since learning of pregnancy);


<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageNumber="Page 21" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->

infant sex assigned at birth (male / female)
Abbreviation: BMI, body mass index

<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->


# Author Manuscript


# Author Manuscript

<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 22" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 3. Associations between urinary glyphosate concentration and preterm birth among women with a pregnancy from Charleston, South Carolina (n = 52).</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th colspan="2">Model 1</th>
<th colspan="2">Model 2</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>OR</th>
<th>95% CI</th>
<th>OR</th>
<th>95% CI</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Urinary glyphosate concentration (ng/ml)“ a</td>
<td>1.13</td>
<td>0.72, 1.83</td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td>0.61, 1.86</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Race</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>White</td>
<td>REF</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>REF</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Black</td>
<td>1.02</td>
<td>0.30, 3.52</td>
<td>0.40</td>
<td>0.08, 2.04</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Education</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥ College</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>REF</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt; College</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>0.31</td>
<td>0.06, 1.61</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Age (years)</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>0.94</td>
<td>0.82, 1.08</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>BMI (kg/m2)</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>1.06</td>
<td>0.96, 1.18</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Season of collection</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fall</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>REF</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Winter</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>3.55</td>
<td>0.53, 23.76</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Spring</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>1.16</td>
<td>0.18, 7.61</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Summer</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>1.42</td>
<td>0.23, 8.81</td>
</tr>
</table>

NOTE: Binomial logistic regression models adjusted for urinary specific gravity;

a

"Glyphosate expressed per interquartile range difference

Abbreviation: BMI, body mass index; CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio; REF, reference group


<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageBreak -->

<!-- PageHeader="Varde et al." -->
<!-- PageNumber="Page 23" -->


<table>
<caption>Table 4. Associations between self-identified maternal race and categorical urinary glyphosate, among women with a term birth from Charleston, South Carolina (n = 26).</caption>
<tr>
<th rowspan="3"></th>
<th colspan="8">Model 1 Model 2</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">High</th>
<th colspan="2">Low</th>
<th colspan="2">High</th>
<th colspan="2">Low</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>OR</th>
<th>95% CI</th>
<th>OR</th>
<th>95% CI</th>
<th>OR</th>
<th>95% CI</th>
<th>OR</th>
<th>95% CI</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Race</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>White</td>
<td>REF</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>REF</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>REF</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>REF</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Black</td>
<td>3.91</td>
<td>0.12, 132.21</td>
<td>0.67</td>
<td>0.04, 10.49</td>
<td>3.83</td>
<td>0.13, 111.33</td>
<td>0.79</td>
<td>0.05, 12.21</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Age (years)</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>0.89</td>
<td>0.70, 1.14</td>
<td>0.93</td>
<td>0.76, 1.14</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>BMI (kg/m2)</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>0.93</td>
<td>0.74, 1.16</td>
<td>0.94</td>
<td>0.76, 1.15</td>
</tr>
</table>

NOTE: Multinomial logistic regression models adjusted for urinary specific gravity; "Medium" urinary glyphosate category was the reference level
Abbreviation: BMI, body mass index; CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio; REF, reference group


<!-- PageFooter="Reprod Toxicol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 April 01." -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageHeader="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Author Manuscript" -->
<!-- PageFooter="Author Manuscript" -->
